October 12, 2017Issue 203|View Past IssuesEditor's NoteThe transition away from coal power continues to gather pace. The new government in theNetherlandshas announced a plan to phase out its five coal plants before 2030. InChina, 151 planned or under-construction plants have been stalled. InTexas, just days before the Trump Administration proclaimed it wants to unpick the Clean Power Plan, a utility announced it would close an old 1800 megawatt (MW) coal plant in January as it is uneconomic.InIndonesia, a cross-party group of MPs is urging the rapid expansion of clean energy and the adoption of international best practice pollution control standards on existing coal plants. PresidentJoko Widodohas flagged the need to cut back plans to build 35,000 MW of new power plants. In thePhilippines, electricity from a new solar farm will be sold to the country’s largest distributor at less than half the cost of new coal power. InAustralia, 16,000 people turned out to rallies around the country opposing Adani’s proposed Carmichael coal mine.Reminders also abound of the heavy price tag that comes with coal. InIndia, it has been revealed that almost nine out of 10 coal plants don’t meet sulphur dioxide emissions standards due to take effect in December. InCanada, another coal company has been fined for polluting important fish habitat. InColombia, 800 people gathered in a small town in the Ceasar district to remember the people killed and dispossessed by paramilitary violence which coincided with the arrival of coal mining.FeaturesChina halts more than 150 coal-fired power plantsChinais to stop or delay work on 151 planned and under-construction coal plants. However, 31 plants were dropped from the list following intense political negotiations,writeLauri Myllyvirta and Li Danqing in Greenpeace’sUnearthed.NEW Beijing to halt 151 #coal powered plants -- good news, but 31 fewer plants than expected @GreenpeaceEAsia #China https://unearthed.greenpeace.org/2017/10/11/china-halts-150-coal-fired-power-plants/Can Trump really repeal the Clean Power Plan?Neither the US Environmental Protection Agency nor President Donald Trump can repeal the Clean Power Plan by fiat, however much they might like to pretend that they can,writesPaul Rauber in theSierra, the magazine of the Sierra Club.CampaignsNetherlands to end coal power before 2030An agreement between four parties in theDutchparliament has committed to phase out all five coal plants in the Netherlands before 2030. As part of the agreement, the oldest coal plant will be closed before 2022. The remaining four plants, including 3500 MW of capacity commissioned in 2015 and 2016, will be closed before 2030. According to Greenpeace Netherlands, the agreement also commits the government to introduce a floor price on carbon dioxide emissions of US$21 per tonne by 2020, rising to US$53 a tonne by 2030. While broadly welcomed by NGO groups, the agreement also proposes to divert a subsidy scheme for new renewables capacity to also be open to Carbon Capture and Storage projects.(Reuters)Top NewsIndonesian MPs push cleaner air and energy policies:TheGreenEconomy Caucus, comprising over 50 members of Indonesia’s parliament, has endorsed a “substantial” increase in investment in clean power and the need to “strengthen” emission standards for coal plants to match the best global standards. The resolution adopted by the caucus also supports the need to expand the network of air quality monitoring stations and an annual assessment of the impacts of each major sector contributing to the country’s air pollution problem.(AirQualityAsia)Australia-wide protests against Adani project:An estimated16,000 peopleattended rallies in 45 cities and towns opposing Adani’s proposed Carmichael coal project. An opinion poll of 2200 people has found 55.6 per cent of respondents opposed the mine going ahead, over twice the number supporting the mine. Opposition to the project spanned the political spectrum. Sixty six per cent of respondents would support the Queensland Government blocking the $900 million loan Adani if a federal government agency approves funding for the project.(350 Australia,Guardian)Few Indian coal plants to meet sulphur dioxide restrictions:TheMinistry of Power informed the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change in June this year that 89 per cent of India’s 165,900 megawatts (MW) of coal plant capacity were not in compliance with the sulphur dioxide (SO2) emission limits adopted in 2015. The new standards are set to take effect in December. Power companies claim it will take up to seven years to add flue gas desulphurisation (FGD) units at the plants. Operators of 19,900 MW of plants claim they either do not have the space or weren’t interested in installing FGD units.(Indian Express)Canadian company fined over toxic spill:Teck Resourceshas been fined US$1.1 million after pleading guilty to three counts of breaching Canada’s Fisheries Act after “numerous” fish were killed in October 2014 by pollution from the Line Creek mine in British Columbia (BC). Teck was fined US2.7 million over a 2016 pollution incident and has a controversial history in BC politics. Teck is the world’s second largest metallurgical coal exporter.(DeSmog,Environment Canada)Colombian town in mining district commemorates victims of violence:Eight hundredpeople attended the town of Estados Unidos (United States) to commemorate the victims of paramilitary violence in the area near the La Jagua mine operated by Prodeco, a subsidiary of Glencore. The town was once home to about 1000 people but was largely depopulated after paramilitary groups emerged when mining companies moved into the Ceasar region in the mid-1990’s. PAX, a Dutch human rights group, welcomed Prodeco’s attendance at the event but noted mining companies have so far failed to address the human rights impacts of their operations.(Colombia Reports,PAX)“I think Carbon Capture and Storage has not been successful. It doesn’t work, let’s call it what it is – it is simply too expensive, too cumbersome, the technology didn’t fly,”saidFrancesco Starace, the CEO of the Italian power utility Enel and the President of Eurelectric, the European electricity industry lobby group.NewsAustralia:NSW Governmentplansto introduce new laws to bypass court ruling on mine pollution.Australia:Victorian Governmentincreasescoal mine rehabilitation bonds by US$262 million.India:Environment ministryapprovescoal mine in “important” elephant migration corridor.Philippines:ProtestagainstBank of the Philippine Islands role in funding coal plants.South Korea:NGOs call forregulationof power companies claims their coal plants are eco-friendly.Thailand:Thai coal executivesaccompaniedmilitary ruler when deal was signed with Trump to buy 155,000 tonnes of US coal.US:Trumpnominatesformer coal lobbyist as Deputy Administrator of Environmental Protection Agency.US:Mapsrevealshundreds of North Carolina properties at risk if Duke Energy coal ash dams fail.Companies + MarketsPhilippines solar deal highlights risk for new coal:Meralco, the largest electricity distributor in the Philippines, has signed a Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) for 85 MW of solar power at 5.8 US cents a kilowatt hour (kWh). Solar Philippines Tarlac argues this could be the standard price for 5000 MW of solar as an alternative to new coal plants. Meralco has been at the centre of a controversy after signing 20 new coal PPA’s, reportedly for an average of 11.7 US cents kWh.(The Standard)Indonesia set to cut new power plant plans:PresidentJoko Widodo has signalled that the plan by PLN, the public electricity utility, to build 35,000 MW of new power plants will need to be modified due to lower than expected economic growth. The original plan proposed 20,000 MW of new coal plants as part of the target.  NGO groups are urging Joko to drop plans for new coal plants and focus on cheaper renewables.(BBC [Indonesian])Wiggins Island coal port stresses coal companies:Glencore and four other coal companies have proposed to repay a consortium of lenders part of the US$3 billion debt as part of a refinancing deal on the Wiggins Island Coal Export Terminal in Queensland. The collapse of three other companies has left the remaining five companies to carry the costs of “take or pay” contracts for 27 million tonnes a year of unused coal capacity. The companies currently pay about US$25 per tonne compared to the US$5 a tonnes at the adjacent RG Tanna terminal.(Reuters)Texas plant closure reflects coal power’s hurdles:InJanuary 2018Vistra Energy will close the 1800 MW Monticello coal plant in Texas due to the “unprecedented low power price environment” which has rendered the plant unprofitable. The viability of the plant has been hit by the combination of low gas prices and a boom in wind power generation.(Houston Chronicle,Bloomberg)Eskom upheavals continue:Eskom’s board has appointed its third CEO in the space of four months after announcing it had decided to “rotate” its last interim CEO, Johnny Dladla, out of the position. Dladla was appointed in June after then CEO, Matshela Koko, was suspended following revelations a company his daughter was director of had won lucrative Eskom contracts and allegations he had been involved in helping the controversial Gupta family business win a coal supply contract.(Independent Online)ResourcesLong Term Plan for the Greek Energy System, WWF Greece, October 2017. (Pdf)This 142-page report by the National Observatory of Athens concludes the cheapest path for Greece to cut greenhouse emissions from the electricity sector by near 2035 is by the rapid expansion of renewable energy and phasing out lignite-fired plants.New study by @WWFGreece shows #lignite phase out is the cheapest route for #Greece #climate #coal http://www.wwf.gr/en/news/2016-can-greece-go-lignite-free #EndCoalA Dwindling Role for Coal, Union of Concerned Scientists, October 2017.This 7-page fact sheet provides an overview of the decline in the US coal fleet and suggests a further 107,000 MW are potentially likely to retire in the next decade.Something Nasty in the Woodshed, Sandbag, October 2017.This report concludes European Union subsidies for biomass co-firing at coal plants is potentially keeping coal plants online longer than would otherwise be the case and making air pollution worse.Share on FacebookShare on TwitterForward to a FriendSubscribe