October 26, 2017Issue 207|View Past IssuesEditor's NotePersistence pays off. InItaly, the government has announced it will phase out all coal plants by 2025, including some recently commissioned units. In Australia, the community ofGloucesterin New South Wales has campaigned since 2008 against two iterations of a proposed coal mine on the edge of the town. Finally, a normally coal-friendly NSW government agency has recommended the Rocky Hill mine not be allowed to proceed, largely because of noise and air pollution.On a global scale, theLancetCommission on Pollution and Health notes that coal power is a major source of air pollution, which the World Health Organization’s Global Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of Non-Communicable Diseases barely mentions. InIndonesia, a proposal to build four new coal plants and extend another would dramatically worsen air pollution for a city of 30 million people. In theUS, a wind farm operator is suing a coal company for damage caused to wind turbine blades by dust blown from a coal dump.The coal scandals keep rolling on too. A former CEO ofSouth Africa’sgovernment-owned power utility, told a parliamentary inquiry how he was lobbied to assist companies owned by the controversial Gupta family. InArgentina, three judges have called for the arrest of a former Minister for Planning to allow an investigation into a failed government-funded coal mine to proceed.CampaignsItaly sets 2025 as end date for coal power plantsTheItalian Governmenthas announced it will close all coal power plants by 2025 and expand renewable generation to provide 27 per cent of the country’s electricity by 2030. The details of the new National Energy Strategy are scheduled to be announced just prior to the adoption of the plan on November 10. Italy currently has 8980 megawatts (MW) of coal plant capacity, with the 1980 MWTorrevaldaliga Nord power stationonly commissioned in 2009–2010. Italian coal plants are overwhelmingly reliant on imported coal.(BusinessGreen,E3G)Planning agency recommends against Australian coal mineAfteroverwhelmingpublic opposition to the proposed Rocky Hill mine near Gloucester, the New South Wales Department of Planning has emphatically recommended the project be rejected. The department, which has a long history of backing controversial projects, concluded the site “is not suitable” for a coal mine due to noise, air quality and visual impacts on nearby residents. It also found the proposal to mine 21 million tonnes of mostly metallurgical coal over 16 years would be incompatible with retaining the scenic and rural character of Gloucester. “For the Gloucester community this is wonderful news,” said Julie Lyford, the founder of Groundswell Gloucester. The Planning Assessment Commission has the final say on whether to reject the proposed mine.(Newcastle Herald,Department of Planning)Top NewsSouth African President challenges need for judicial inquiry:South Africa’sHigh Court has heard President Zuma’s legal challenge against a recommendation by the country’s anti-corruption agency that the chief justice appoint a judge to investigate allegations of “state capture” including those related to Eskom, the publicly owned utility, and the deals it entered into with the businesses of the controversial Gupta family. Former Eskom CEO, Brian Dames, has told a parliamentary committee hearing he was directly lobbied to assist the Gupta family companies with coal contracts and to discuss a sponsorship deal for business breakfasts hosted by a newspaper owned by one of the family companies. Dames, who was CEO between 2010 and 2014, told the committee that Eskom board members regularly intervened in procurement processes.(Eyewitness News,Mail & Guardian)Health study estimates air pollution killed 9 million in 2015:TheLancetCommission on Pollution and Health estimates that air pollution killed 9 million people in 2015. The commission estimated that the burning of fossil fuels in high- and middle-income countries and the use of biomass in low-income countries accounted for 85 per cent of airborne particulate pollution and for almost all pollution by oxides of sulphur and nitrogen. The commission noted that while more than 70 per cent of the diseases caused by pollution were non-communicable diseases, the issue of pollution control was “barely mentioned” in the World Health Organization’s Global Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of Non-Communicable Diseases.(Guardian,Lancet Commission on Pollution and Health [registration required])US wind operator sues company for coal dust damage:Theoperatorof a 50 MW wind farm in Maryland is suing Alliance Resource Partners (ARP) over damage to the blades on its wind turbines caused by dust pollution from a 65 metre high coal waste dump. Gestamp Wind North America alleges the coal dust has done extensive damage to the blades on nine turbines and caused the air-conditioning unit on one to fail. Gestamp argues it has incurred US$219,000 in losses since 2011 and estimates ongoing losses of US$103,000 a year. It wants ARP to be fined US$75,000 on each count of trespass, negligence and nuisance.(Courthouse News,Gestamp Wind North America)New coal plants would worsen Jakarta’s air pollution problem:Theproposedconstruction of four new coal plants and the expansion of another could cause 10,600 premature deaths in the Greater Jakarta area, according to Greenpeace Indonesia. Indonesia currently has no limits on mercury or sulphur dioxide emissions from coal power plants. In the first nine months of 2017, monitoring at the US Embassy revealed Jakarta’s air quality has met the US standard of “good” on only 14 days.(Jakarta Post)Opposition to Myanmar coal plant grows:Civil society groups have rejected the suggestion by Karen State chief minister, Nang Khin Htwe Myint, that opponents of the proposed 1280 MW plant near the village of Hpa-an plant confine their comments to “constructive support” for the project. A group of 25 community leaders, including monks from the project area, visited communities affected by land confiscation for coal mines near Dawei, where a major port and power project is proposed. The Hpa-an coal plant project is being promoted by TTLC, a Thai construction company.(DVB,CoalSwarm)Judges want former Argentinean minister arrested over coal mine:Three judgeshave ordered the arrest of Julio De Vido, the former Minister for Planning and Public Investment, as part of an investigation into the problems with the Rio Turbio coal mine in Patagonia. The judges also recommended that Congress remove De Vido’s immunity from prosecution as a member of parliament. Prosecutors are investigating the inability of the mine to produce the required volume of coal for the stalled 240 MW Rio Turbio power station, despite the government having invested millions of dollars in the project.(Merco Press,CoalSwarm)NewsAustralia:Adanilauncheslow-profile online ad campaign defending the viability of its Australian projects.Czech Republic:New President likely toreshapepublicly owned utility CEZ, with potential impacts on coal plants.Germany:Ahead of negotiations with Merkel, Greens leadercallsfor “clear schedule” to meet 2020 climate targets.Philippines:Department of Energycallsfor bids for new coal mines to increase domestic production.Thailand:Krung Thai bank may have towrite offUS$361 million after collapse of coal trader.US:Class actionfiledagainst Rio Tinto over inadequate disclosure of Mozambique mine problems.Companies + MarketsOpposition to Trump coal and nuclear bailout plan grows:The request by US Energy Secretary Rick Perry that the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) develop a rule to subsidise coal and nuclear plants has been rejected by PJM Interconnection, the largest grid operator in the US. PJM Interconnection, which serves 13 states and the District of Columbia, described the proposal as “unworkable” and said it would push prices up. Coal and nuclear plants account for about half the capacity in the PJM Interconnection service area. Perry’s proposal has also been criticised by eight former FERC commissioners as a plan which would “fundamentally distort” the electricity market.(NPR,Reuters)BHP faces AGM challenge on membership of coal lobby groups:A shareholder resolution put to the London Annual General Meeting of BHP by the Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility urging the company to reconsider its membership of the Minerals Council of Australia attracted support from the HSBC and the major US pension fund, Calpers. The resolution will also be put to shareholders In Melbourne on November 16.(Guardian,ACCR)Renewables undermine Siemens:Thousands of jobs are likely to be cut from the Power and Gas division of Siemens, a global engineering and services company, as demand for coal and gas turbines declines due to the rapid growth of renewables. In August, the company reported the Power and Gas division suffered a 41 per cent fall in orders in the three months to the end of June, attributing the change to “global energy trends”. At the time of the company’s quarterly results Siemens Chief Financial Officer, Ralf Thomas, described the downturn in the fossil fuel turbine sector as a structural shift in the market.(Reuters,Bloomberg)Australian coal port capacity glut:Australia’s coal export ports have, based on 2016 volumes, surplus export capacity of 130 million tonnes a year, according to figures compiled by the consultancy IHS Markit. The consultancy estimates the current coal port capacity is 524 million tonnes a year. The glut of coal export capacity comes as Adani struggles to refinance US$1.6 billion in loans for its Abbot Point coal terminal in Queensland.(Bede Boyle HiValue Strategies)ResourcesJakarta's Silent Killer, Greenpeace SE Asia, October 2017. (Pdf)This 20-page report concludes that four proposed coal plants near Jakarta would dramatically increase the pollution exposure for the city’s 30 million residents.New report Jakarta's Silent Killer on #pollution impact of 4 proposed #coal plants #Indonesia #JakartaUnderPollution http://www.greenpeace.org/seasia/id/PageFiles/766303/Jakarta's%20Silent%20Killer%20Report%20-%20Oct%2024%202017.pdfEnergy Access Outlook: From Poverty to Prosperity, International Energy Agency (IEA), October 2017. (Pdf) (Executive summary ishere.)This 144-page IEA report outlines why renewable power is set to dominate access to electricity in large parts of the world, with new coal capacity set to decline dramatically.Mainly Coal Advocacy: What does the MCA stand for?, Australia Institute, October 2017. (Pdf)This 32-page report documents the disparity between the diverse commodity interests of the members of the Minerals Council of Australia (MCA) and promoting coal which dominates the lobby group’s public advocacy.Share on FacebookShare on TwitterForward to a FriendSubscribe