Campaign URLCopyTwitter0tweetsSubscribePast IssuesRSSTranslateEnglishالعربيةAfrikaansбеларуская мовабългарскиcatalà中文（简体）中文（繁體）HrvatskiČeskyDanskeesti keelNederlandsSuomiFrançaisDeutschΕλληνικήहिन्दीMagyarGaeilgeIndonesiaíslenskaItaliano日本語ភាសាខ្មែរ한국어македонски јазикبهاس ملايوMaltiNorskPolskiPortuguêsPortuguês - PortugalRomânăРусскийEspañolKiswahiliSvenskaעבריתLietuviųlatviešuslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпскиதமிழ்ภาษาไทยTürkçeFilipinoукраї́нськаTiếng ViệtNovember 23, 2023Issue 491|View Past IssuesPublished byGlobal Energy MonitorEditor's NoteThe Indonesian Supreme Court’sdecisionrejecting President Joko Widodo’s request to overturn a lower court decision directing the government to curb Jakarta’s air pollution crisis is vindication for the 32 residents who launched the case. While the government can appeal, the pressure is growing to take action on the significant sources of air pollution, including coal plants in neighbouring provinces. The court win comes as the Indonesian governmentconfirmedit won’t pursue early coal plant closures under the Just Energy Transition Partnership.In South Africa, a similar debate is playing out. In the face of a climate protest and objections from major investors to its weak emissions reduction targets, the coal-to-oil producer Sasolcancelledits annual general meeting. As one of the country’s big coal producers and consumers, Sasol’sdecisionsmatter. The South African government also faces difficult choices on how to manage Eskom’s ailing coal fleet. The recent bailout of theutilityby the national treasury was conditional on identifying the plants with the best chance of operating reliably and allocating concessions to run them to private operators. A business strategy of running some coal plants hard and retiring those that aren’t worth upgrading relies on an accelerated rollout of renewables.FeaturesWhat steel decarbonisation needsIt is technically and economically feasible to eliminate almost all the carbon dioxide from iron and steel production by mid-century, but progress will not happen without a policy push by governments,writeChris Bataille and Gernot Wagner inProject Syndicate.Finding a sustainable route for transitioning South Africa’s coal-to-oil plants to a net-zero futureHow does South Africa grapple with the trade-off between our collective investment in and systemic reliance on the state-owned coal-to-oil producer Sasol and our need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions,askBrett Cohen, Lonwabo Mgoduso and Lester Malgas in theDaily Maverick.The US Federal Bureau of Investigations raided a regulator’s home. FirstEnergy said it bribed him with millions. Since then, silenceNo charges have been filed against either the FirstEnergy executives or the former chairman of the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio, Sam Randazzo, the second high-ranking public official the company said it bribed,writesJake Zuckerman inCleveland.com.Top NewsIndonesian court rejects government bid to overturn pollution ruling:Indonesia’s Supreme Court has rejected a request by President Joko Widodo and three ministers to overturn a Central Jakarta District Court ruling that the central government and three provincial governors were guilty of negligence for failing to cut air pollution in Jakarta. In 2019, 32 residents of Greater Jakarta filed a lawsuit against Widodo, the ministers and the governors of Jakarta, Banten and West Java, requesting the defendants adopt measures to improve air quality in Jakarta. Civil society groups have welcomed the decision and want Widodo to initiate improvements before the end of his term in early 2024. The plaintiffs want the ministers to tighten national ambient air quality standards to protect human health and the environment and for the Minister of Health to oversee efforts by Jakarta, Banten and West Java governors to cut pollution, including from coal power plants. The government can appeal the latest decision but only if it can provide new evidence or arguments not relied on in previous challenges.(Jakarta Post [Paywall],Nexus3 Foundation [Indonesian])Study says pollution from Canadian mines has increased dramatically:A study by US Geological Survey researchers could find nothing in the scientific literature that is “even close” to the trends of selenium, nitrate and sulphate pollution concentrations in the Elk River in British Columbia. Teck Resources, which operates four metallurgical coal mines in the Elk Valley, is seeking approval to sell the projects to Glencore. The study reports that selenium concentrations have grown by 581 per cent and nitrate concentrations by 784 per cent since 1979. At high concentrations, selenium is toxic to fish and can cause deformities. The study attributes the increase in nitrate pollution, which can contribute to harmful algal blooms, mainly to the ammonium nitrate in mining explosives. Pollution from the Elk River flows into Lake Koocanusa in the US, sparking alarm from First Nations and NGO groups in both countries and US regulators. The study found that the Canadian standard of 2.0 micrograms of selenium per litre and Montana’s standard for Lake Koocanusa of 0.8 micrograms per litre are “regularly exceeded on both sides of the border”. The study found that selenium concentrations in Lake Koocanusa have exceeded 0.8 micrograms since July 2020.(Montana Free Express,Environmental Science and Technology)Former New South Wales Minister to face court over coal port:Former New South Wales Minister for Ports, Joe Tripodi, will be prosecuted for misconduct in public office for allegedly leaking a “highly confidential” 2011 Treasury document to Buildev, a company part-owned by then coal billionaire Nathan Tinkler. Buildev was proposing to build a coal terminal and was seeking government support for the project. Tripodi is due to face court for an initial hearing on November 28, 2023. A 2016 Independent Commission Against Corruption report found evidence of “serious corrupt conduct” by Tripodi and recommended the Director of Public Prosecutions initiate action against him. The proposed coal terminal did not proceed.(ABC News,Independent Commission Against Corruption)European Union calls on China to drop new coal plant plans:The European Union’s climate commissioner, Wopke Hoekstra, has criticised China’s construction of new coal plants, stating it is “something we would rather not see and about which we are critical.” Hoekstra welcomed China’s recently released methane plan but said more needs to be done. Ahead of the COP28 conference, France – with the backing of the US – will propose a ban on private financing for new coal plants.(ABCNews,Reuters)Global coal lobby group changes name as part of rebranding:The World Coal Association (WCA), the peak lobby group for some major coal companies and national associations, has renamed itself FutureCoal – The Global Alliance for Sustainable Coal. The group’s website recently listed only 18 corporate members, including Adani, Coal India, Peabody, Whitehaven Coal and the Russian coal producer SUEK. Announcing the change, the WCA’s chief executive, Michelle Manook, complained that “for too long our global coal value chain has allowed anti-coal sentiment to dominate and fragment us, which has resulted in a lowering of the global coal IQ”.(World Coal Association)Coal ship sinks in Bangladesh:The MV Prince of Ghashiakhali, which was carrying 800 tonnes of coal, sank in the Passur River near the port of Mongla. Coal ships travel past the Sundarbans World Heritage Area, the world’s largest mangrove forest, to reach Mongla. The hull of the Prince of Ghashiakhali reportedly breached during a storm after being loaded as part of a transhipment operation. The 12 crew swam to shore. Civil society groups have expressed alarm at the increased volume of coal shipped through and past the Sundarbans for new coal power plants reliant on imported coal and for industrial plants. In the last five years, at least four other coal ships have sunk in or near the Sundarbans.(Dhaka Tribune,RisingBD)NewsCanada:The Nova Scotia governmentsaysKameron Coal can restart operations at its Donkin metallurgical coal mine if a hazard assessment plan is updated and there is extra monitoring of the access tunnel roof. Mining was suspended in July after a series of roof falls.US:A protest at the LA Auto Showfocussedon Hyundai’s reliance on coal-based steel and labour practices. Hyundai ranks tenth out of 18 electric vehicle manufacturers reviewed by Lead the Charge, a coalition of environmental and labour groups.US:Georgia regulators haveapproveda plan by Georgia Power to leave coal ash at Plant Hammond in contact with groundwater. Environmental groups have called on the EPA to override the decision.Vietnam:AES isnegotiatingthe potential sale of its 51 per cent stake in the 1200 megawatt (MW) Mong Duong 2 to Sev.en Global Investments, a part of the Czech energy firm Sev.en Group.Companies + MarketsIndonesia baulks at coal plant phase-out:The Minister for Energy’s electricity director general, Jisman Hutajulu, said that the ministry and public power utility PLN have agreed on cutting greenhouse gas emissions from the power sector by measures such as co-firing with hydrogen and ammonia and carbon capture and storage rather than closing coal plants. The government’s position has hardened as the amount of grant and concessional finance available through the Just Energy Transition Partnership was relatively low. Jisman said that early retirement of coal plants is still possible “if funding is available and if it does not interfere with [electricity] system reliability”. The government plans to focus on reducing emissions from PLN’s fleet of coal plants and, later on, reduce the share of generation bought from privately owned plants under power purchase agreements. PLN’s president director, Darmawan Prasodjo, told a parliamentary committee hearing last week that the costs of an early coal retirement scenario were too high. Fabby Tumiwa from the Institute for Essential Services Reform said abandoning coal retirement would make it much harder for PLN to attract funding for renewables development.(Jakarta Post [Paywall])Sasol cancels annual general meeting after climate protest:Sasol, the South African government-owned coal-to-oil producer, abandoned its annual general meeting after climate protesters occupied the stage as chief executive Fleetwood Grobler sought to address shareholders. Sasol is South Africa’s second-largest greenhouse gas emitter. Ahead of the meeting, two major shareholders – Ninety One and Old Mutual Investment Group – had warned the company that they would vote against its climate report over the failure to detail commitments to reduce emissions by one-third by 2030. Just Share, a responsible investing advocacy group, argues Sasol has been setting and missing greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets for the last 20 years. Sasol operates 17 boilers at its Secunda coal-to-oil plant, which consumes about 33 million tonnes of coal annually. In 2020, Sasol lobbied for and was granted a five-year extension for compliance with sulphur dioxide emission limits that were first announced in 2010.(Financial Times,Just Share)Review of Eskom’s coal plants poses problems for the government:An inspection of Eskom’s 15 coal plants by the VGBe Consortium of Steag, RWE-Tech, Vattenfall and KWS eG has reportedly identified the plants that could be repaired to original equipment specifications. The review was a condition the Minister of Finance, Enoch Godongwana, insisted on before the National Treasury provided a 247 billion rand (US$13.5 billion) bailout to Eskom. The condition states the utility “must” contract the identified plants capable of operating viably to private operators “with clear targets for the electricity availability factor and operations”. The final report has not been made public. The report’s recommendations will present political challenges for President Cyril Ramaphosa. The constant blackouts have undermined the government’s standing, but the Minister for Resources and Energy, Gwede Mantashe, and others oppose the retirement of coal plants and a rapid shift to a renewable-dominated power system.(Business Day [Paywall])KEPCO’s financial troubles deepen:A report by the Institute for Energy Economics & Financial Analysis (IEEFA) warns that the South Korean public utility KEPCO is facing another year of significant losses after incurring an operating loss of US$24 billion in 2022. The utility is looking to take on more debt as it has reached its corporate bond ceiling and faces US$39 billion in bonds maturing between 2024 and 2025. KEPCO’s CEO, Kim Dong-cheol, recently sought to blame the company’s financial crisis in part on the policies of the previous South Korean government to phase out nuclear capacity and expand renewables, but KEPCO data reveals its nuclear and renewables generation has barely changed since 2017. KEPCO’s reliance on imported fossil fuel has exposed it to volatile international prices. KEPCO has allocated only six per cent of its capital expenditure in 2023 for renewable projects and has not disclosed forward estimates.(Institute for Energy Economics & Financial Analysis)Indian agency seeks court ruling to obtain Adani coal import records:India’s Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) has requested the Supreme Court overturn a 2019 High Court of Mumbai ruling blocking access to Singapore government agencies and bank records on Adani Group coal purchases. In an October 9 affidavit, DRI rejected Adani’s claims in the Mumbai proceedings that it had not followed due process, pointing to support from the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Home Affairs. In 2014, DRI began its investigation into coal import transactions by 40 companies, including Adani entities, alleging coal prices were inflated to shift funds offshore to tax havens and used to justify higher power charges in India from company-owned power stations. In late 2020, on Adani’s request, the Singapore court blocked the release of documents until a final Supreme Court decision on DRI’s application. DRI’s application will be heard on February 6, 2024. If the Supreme Court grants DRI’s request, the agency will require an order from Singapore’s Court of Appeal to release the transaction records.(Reuters,The Indian Express)India pondering weakening restrictions on underground coal mining:India’s Ministry of Coal is considering revisions to financial requirements for private coal mining companies developing new underground mines. A condition of coal blocks auctioned to private companies for commercial production was the payment of four per cent of revenue to the host state. The ministry proposes halving the revenue-sharing payment, a windfall for the companies. The ministry is also proposing relaxing the requirement of performance bank guarantees required to obtain loans. The tender documents required the guarantees to be revised annually in April in line with the National Coal Index. The ministry proposes relaxing the guarantee needed after changing the timing earlier this year to the initial revision when permission is granted for mine commissioning.(LiveMint)European Bank proposes funding for North Macedonia coal plant closures:The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the World Bank are proposing a €3 billion (US$3.26 billion) Just Energy Transition Investment Program to fund the replacement of North Macedonia’s two coal plants with 1700 MW of renewable projects. The plan will be announced at the COP28 climate negotiations in Dubai, which begin on November 30. The 125 MW Oslomej plant and the 699 MW Bitola plant burn lignite and significantly contribute to the country’s poor air quality. The plants were initially slated for closure in 2021 and 2027, but the Oslomej plant was recently restarted to cut electricity imports, while the closure date for the Bitola plant has been deferred until 2030.(Reuters)Rio Tinto reaches US$28 million settlement with US regulator over Mozambique coal deal:Rio Tinto has agreed to pay US$28 million as part of a settlement agreement with the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which had charged the company with fraud over failing to disclose the actual value of its coal assets in Mozambique. Rio Tinto bought the Benga and Moatize coal mines in Mozambique from Riversdale for US$3.7 billion in 2011. The SEC alleged that shortly after purchasing the mine, Rio Tinto executives discovered the project contained less coal than envisaged, the quality was lower than estimated, and the government of Mozambique had rejected its application to barge 30 million tonnes of coal a year down the Zambezi River to near Chinde. The SEC alleged key Rio Tinto executives breached disclosure obligations to the board, auditor, and investors. In May 2012, Rio Tinto Coal Mozambique informed senior Rio Tinto executives that the subsidiary could be worth -US$680 million. Despite this, Rio Tinto raised over US$3 billion from investors without writing down the value of its Mozambique coal assets.(Nasdaq,Australian Financial Review [Paywall])ResourcesGlobal Methane Emitters Tracker, Global Energy Monitor, November 2023.This interactive database includes data on methane emissions from coal mines worldwide. It also includes oil and gas projects.China’s Climate Transition Outlook 2023: Expert Survey and Interviews, Centre for Research on Energy and Clean Air and the International Society for Energy Transition Studies, November 2023. (Pdf)This 20-page report collates the views of 89 climate and energy experts on whether China is on track to meet its climate commitments.Climate Equality: A planet for the 99%, Oxfam, November 2023. (Pdf) (The Executive summary ishere.)This 136-page report argues that the super-rich and rich – the top 1 per cent and 10 per cent by income, respectively – have significant climate impacts through their consumption habits, investments, and influence over the media, the economy, politics and policy-making.Share on FacebookShare on TwitterForward to a FriendSubscribe