Campaign URLCopyTwitter0tweetsSubscribePast IssuesRSSTranslateEnglishالعربيةAfrikaansбеларуская мовабългарскиcatalà中文（简体）中文（繁體）HrvatskiČeskyDanskeesti keelNederlandsSuomiFrançaisDeutschΕλληνικήहिन्दीMagyarGaeilgeIndonesiaíslenskaItaliano日本語ភាសាខ្មែរ한국어македонски јазикبهاس ملايوMaltiNorskPolskiPortuguêsPortuguês - PortugalRomânăРусскийEspañolKiswahiliSvenskaעבריתLietuviųlatviešuslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпскиதமிழ்ภาษาไทยTürkçeFilipinoукраї́нськаTiếng ViệtApril 4, 2024Issue 508|View Past IssuesPublished byGlobal Energy MonitorEditor's NoteThe warning by the Australian government’s own resources agency that “green steel production may harm” the demand for metallurgical coal is a telling comment on the growing pressure to shift away from coal-based steel production. Theagencywarned of falling demand and prices. Australia, as the world’s largest exporter of metallurgical coal, has every reason to be worried.The shift away from thermal coal continues with the closure of old coal plants. InGermany, time has finally run out for 15 coal units that gained a temporary life extension after Russia’s February 2022 invasion of Ukraine. InBulgaria, old lignite units that also gained a temporary boost due to the European energy crisis amidst a switch away from reliance on Russian gas and coal are now closing as economic losses take their toll.In the US, the government-ownedTennessee Valley Authorityhas finally announced the closure of the 1700 megawatt (MW) Kingston coal plant. The plant is notorious for the 2008 coal ash dam disaster that spilled one billion gallons of toxic waste into the adjoining rivers. After a long campaign by environmental groups, a utility has finally announced that two coal plants inNew Hampshirewill close by 2028. InUtah, the news is less optimistic, with a major utility backtracking on closure dates for two coal plants it announced just last year. InBrazil, the move to establish legislation governing the establishment of offshore wind generation has been stalled by legislators wanting to delay the closure of coal plants until 2050.FeaturesWhy open-pit coal mining in Phulbari will be disastrousA plan to extract coal through open-pit mining in Phulbari and the northern part of the Barapukuria coal mine area is being revived by the Bangladesh government, despite strong opposition by locals and environmentalists due to its devastating impact on agriculture, environment, and livelihoods,writesKallol Mustafa inThe Daily Star.Adani’s Dhirauli coal mine: government body concerned about plan to destroy forestsAn expert body has raised concerns over the likely impact on forests and wildlife from theAdani Group’s massive Dhirauli coal-mining project in central India,writesAyaskant Das inAdani Watch.CampaignsUS state of New Hampshire set to be coal-free by 2028The last two coal plants in New Hampshire will close by 2028 as the result of an agreement reached between the Sierra Club, the Conservation Law Foundation, and the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and Granite Shore Power. Under the agreement, Granite Shore Power, a privately-owned power utility, will close the 120 MW Schiller plant in 2025 and the 460 MW Merrimack plant in 2028. In early 2023, the Merrimack plant exceeded EPA pollution limits by 70 per cent but has not completed a retest since. According to the New Hampshire Department of Environment Services, Merrimack plant does not currently meet EPA air quality standards. With the closure of the plant, New Hampshire will become the 16th coal-free state in the US, and New England will be the second coal-free region. The company said it is pursuing the establishment of a battery energy storage project at the Schiller plant site and a clean energy project at the Merrimack plant site.(NHPR,Sierra Club,Granite Shore Power)US utility announces closure of Kingston coal plantThe US government-owned Tennessee Valley Authority announced it will close the 1700 MW Kingston Fossil Plant by the end of 2027 and replace it with a 1500 MW gas plant, 100 MW of battery storage and 4 MW of solar capacity. In late December 2008, a tailings dam at the plant failed, with an estimated 1 billion gallons (4.2 million cubic metres) of coal ash spilling into Emory River and Clinch River and smothering up to 300 acres (1.2 square kilometres) of land. The coal ash disaster was the largest industrial spill in US history. About 60 cleanup workers have died after their exposure to the coal ash due to poor work practices, with hundreds more suffering severe health effects. The coal ash cleanup was the subject of protracted litigation by affected workers against Jacobs Engineering, the TVA contractor. The Sierra Club has welcomed the closure of the plant but criticised TVA’s insistence on replacing the plant with a gas power station. The group argues that replacing the plant’s capacity with clean energy would save customers US$630 million.(Knoxville News Sentinel,Tennessee Valley Authority,Sierra Club)Top NewsGermany shutters 15 coal units:RWE and LEAG closed seven lignite units with a combined capacity of 3100 MW at the end of March. The decommissioning dates of two of the units at RWE’s Neurath plant were extended to reduce reliance on expensive imported gas generation after Russia’s February 2022 invasion of Ukraine. Five other units that have closed – two units at RWE’s Niederaussem power plant, one at its Neurath power plant and two units at LEAG’s Janschwalde plant – were brought online in 2022 from the pool of reserve capacity. The Federal Network Agency, Germany’s energy regulator, has confirmed the permanent closure of eight smaller coal units with a combined capacity of 1300 MW.(Clean Energy Wire)Australian govt mulls giving water decisions on coal mines to states:Environmental groups have condemned an Australian government proposal to weaken the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation (EPBC) Act to allow the assessment of significant coal and gas projects to be handled by state and territory governments. In 2013, at the insistence of then-independent MP Tony Windsor, the EPBC Act was amended to designate decisions on coal and gas projects affecting water resources as a matter of national environmental significance. The amendment explicitly ruled out delegating decision-making on water policy to state and territory governments. Ahead of the 2022 federal election, the Labor Party vowed that it would extend the water trigger to include shale gas projects and it would be “applied independently and without delegation”.(Guardian,Lock the Gate)South African coal plants dominate the list of pollution hotspots in Africa:A report by Greenpeace Africa found that nine of the ten largest sulphur dioxide emission hotspots on the continent are associated with coal power plants, with six Eskom plants in South Africa dominating the list. The report noted that government data on emissions in Africa is patchy, so the authors relied on satellite measurements. The other major sulphur dioxide emission hotspots include two plants in Morocco, the Abu Dhabi National Energy Company’s 2056 MW Jorf Lasfar coal plant and ONEE’s 600 MW Mohammedia coal and oil plant. Nine of the top 10 emitters of nitrogen dioxide are in South Africa, with the list including eight Eskom coal plants and Sasol’s Secunda coal-to-oil project. The report highlights that deaths attributed to outdoor air emissions are projected to worsen, highlighting the need to end reliance on fossil fuels, boost clean energy and ensure better regulation of air quality and emissions.(Bloomberg,Greenpeace Africa [Pdf])Standoff over coal closures stalls offshore wind auctions:A bill before the Brazilian Congress to regulate the development of offshore wind farms has stalled, with some legislators proposing amendments to allow current coal plants in Santa Catarina state to operate through to 2050. Another amendment proposes contracting gas power plant capacity, with the cost estimated at up to US$7.8 billion. Brazil has 3177 MW of coal capacity, according to the Global Coal Plant Tracker, but generates less than three per cent of the country’s electricity. In October 2022, the left-wing Workers Party candidate Lula da Silva narrowly defeated the incumbent right-wing President Jair Bolsonaro, but the congress leans right. Lula has proposed diversifying Brazil’s power grid away from fossil fuels and overreliance on hydro generation, which is vulnerable to increasingly volatile rainfall patterns.(Bloomberg,Brazilian Report)NewsAustralia:The New South Wales government couldpayup to A$150 million (US$97 million) a year to keep the 2880 MW Eraring coal plant online. AGL Energy said it wants to close the plant by August 2025.Australia:The Federal Court of Australia hasfoundVanguard Investments Australia breached Australian securities law by misleadingly claiming investments in an index fund excluded fossil fuel exposure.India:Mukesh Ambani’s Reliance Industries hasboughta 26 per cent stake in Adani Power subsidiary, Mahan Energen. The deal will provide Reliance with 500 MW for captive use in Madhya Pradesh.Indonesia:PT Harum Energy, a coal mining company, hasboughta 51 per cent stake in Blue Sparking Energy, a company building a nickel processing plant at Weda Bay in North Maluku province. In January, Harum Energy bought a 60.7 per cent share in Westrong Metal Industry, which operates a nickel smelter at Weda Bay Industrial Park.Japan:Amazon hascriticisedthe Japanese government for not doing enough to expand renewable energy generation.Japan:Residents call for moreinformationon the cause of the January 31 fire at JERA’s 1070 MW Taketoyo Thermal Power Station, which is co-fired with biomass.US:According to an analyst, thecollapseof the Baltimore bridge is likely to slow coal production in West Virginia and the northern Appalachian basin until the shipping lane reopens.US:The Republican Governor of Utah, Spencer Cox, hassignedinto law a bill that aims to keep the 1640 MW Intermountain Power Plant operating past its scheduled retirement in 2025.US:Ohio Attorney General Dave Yostfileda 63-page document detailing the allegations against Sam Randazzo, the former Chairman of the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio, who is accused of receiving a US$4.3 million bribe to advance the interests of FirstEnergy.US:The Sierra Club and two West Virginia environmental groupsreachedan agreement with the Environmental Protection Agency to develop ionic toxicity pollution standards for 11 West Virginia streams polluted by coal mining.Companies + MarketsBulgarian coal generation collapses:Bulgaria’s Energy and Water Regulatory Commission has informed parliament that electricity generation by the country’s coal plants fell by 51 per cent in 2023, undercut by high carbon prices, growing renewables generation, and declining power exports. According to the Global Coal Plant Tracker, Bulgaria has 4569 MW of coal plant capacity, with the official phase-out date set as 2038. The CEO of the 908 MW ContourGlobal Maritsa East 3 plant, which is owned by the investment firm KKR, announced 160 workers or one-third of the workforce will be laid off and the plant shut until later in the year. The 1602 MW lignite-fired Maritsa East 2 complex owned by state-owned Bulgarian Energy Holding is operating at just one-third of its capacity after a local court revoked a permit allowing it to breach European Union pollution limits. Bulgaria is potentially eligible for €1.2 billion (US$1.3 billion) from the European Union’s Just Transition Plan to support the economic diversification of coal regions and more than €2 billion (US$2.15 billion) from the Recovery Plan for new energy projects.(Balkan Green Energy News,Euractiv)Vietnamese official wants proposed coal plant switched to burn LNG:The deputy chair of Nam Dinh People’s Committee, Tran Anh Dung, has called for the government to switch the proposed 1200 MW Nam Dinh 1 from using coal to LNG. The US$2.2 billion plant, which was first proposed in 2013, has been awarded to a consortium comprising the South Korean company Taekwang Power and Saudi Arabian Acwa Power. The country’s national power development plan lists the plant as a priority project, but the concession currently expires in June 2024. The consortium has not completed negotiations for a power purchase agreement.(Vietnamnet)Report says Indian states need to prepare for a decline in coal revenue:A report by the Institute for Energy Economics & Financial Analysis (IEEFA) warns that major Indian coal-producing states need to plan for declining revenue as growing renewables undercut fossil fuel demand. Three states – Odisha, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh – produce 560 million tonnes or 62 per cent of India’s coal production. IEEFA notes that Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh, in particular, are heavily exposed, with income from coal and petroleum accounting for about 30 per cent and 21 per cent of their revenues, respectively. The report says the three states will need to increase spending to diversify the state’s economy and notes that Jharkhand, in particular, already lags behind most other states on critical social and economic indicators.(Outlook,Institute for Energy Economics & Financial Analysis,Coal Transitions [Pdf])India extends order for imported coal plants to run through summer:India’s Ministry of Power has ordered coal plants reliant on imported coal to run at full capacity until September, extending a directive that was due to expire in June. The India Meteorological Department has forecast 10 to 20 heatwave days between April and June, up from the usual four to eight days. The increase in likely heatwave days will drive a significant increase in air-conditioning use. The ministry anticipates that India’s summertime peak demand could reach 260,000 MW, a seven per cent increase on the 243,000 MW peak in 2023. The ministry is also considering a separate directive for gas plants. In the year to February 2024, India’s electricity demand grew by 6.8 per cent, with coal and gas generation up by almost 10 per cent. India’s thermal coal imports for the first quarter of 2024 increased to 42.8 million tonnes, up 23.8 per cent compared to the same period in 2023.(Livemint,Hindu Business Line,Reuters)US utility backtracks on coal closures but faces regulatory hurdles:Rocky Mountain Power, a PacifiCorp subsidiary that Berkshire Hathaway Energy owns, has backtracked on its plans announced in March 2023 to close two coal plants in Utah by 2032. Rocky Mountain Power has reinstated its original close date of 2036 for the 1037 MW Huntington plant and 2042 for the 1577 MW Hunter plant. The utility said its change was attributable to the prospect that the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) implementation of the Ozone Transport Rule may allow the plants to continue operating. However, the day before the utility’s announcement, the EPA published a consent decree stating that it would issue a federal haze rule for Utah and Wyoming by November 2024. Rocky Mountain Power’s two plants in Utah are significant contributors to regional haze pollution.(Salt Lake Tribune,Sierra Club)Green Steel TransitionAustralian government agency acknowledges risk to met coal demand:The latestResources and Energy Quarterlypublished by the Australian government’s Department of Industry, Science and Resources (DISR) estimates the global export trade for metallurgical coal may fall from 349 million tonnes in 2023 to 333 million tonnes in 2029. Australia supplied 151 million tonnes to the seaborne metallurgical coal trade in 2023, with Mongolia, Russia, and the US as the next largest producers, exporting 48, 44, and 43 million tonnes, respectively. DISR warned that “higher electric arc furnace (EAF) and green steel production may harm the demand for metallurgical coal from steel mills using blast furnaces”. The agency also forecasts that metallurgical coal contract prices could fall from US$295 per tonne to US$186 in real terms and notes that the current trend of falling prices could undercut or delay new metallurgical coal mine capacity. The agency estimates global steel consumption may increase from 1893 million tonnes in 2023 to 2050 million tonnes in 2029, an 8.2 per cent increase.(Institute for Energy Economics & Financial Analysis,Department of Industry, Science and Resources [Pdf])ResourcesJust Transition and the Labor Market in South Africa: Measuring Individual and Household Coal Economy Dependence, University of Oxford, March 2024. (Pdf)This 93-page report details the direct and indirect jobs associated with South Africa’s coal industry.Share on FacebookShare on TwitterForward to a FriendSubscribe