Campaign URLCopyTwitter0tweetsSubscribePast IssuesRSSTranslateEnglishالعربيةAfrikaansбеларуская мовабългарскиcatalà中文（简体）中文（繁體）HrvatskiČeskyDanskeesti keelNederlandsSuomiFrançaisDeutschΕλληνικήहिन्दीMagyarGaeilgeIndonesiaíslenskaItaliano日本語ភាសាខ្មែរ한국어македонски јазикبهاس ملايوMaltiNorskPolskiPortuguêsPortuguês - PortugalRomânăРусскийEspañolKiswahiliSvenskaעבריתLietuviųlatviešuslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпскиதமிழ்ภาษาไทยTürkçeFilipinoукраї́нськаTiếng ViệtApril 11, 2024Issue 509|View Past IssuesPublished byGlobal Energy MonitorEditor's NoteThe decision by the Korean carmakerHyundaito exit from an agreement to source aluminium from a new coal-based smelter in Indonesia illustrates some of the shifting dynamics when it comes to coal. The youth-focused South Korean group Kpop4Planet mobilised supporters to pressure Hyundai, a global carmaker reliant on public reputation to sell its product, to back out of what was clearly a poor management decision.There have been significant legal cases affecting coal as well. InCanada, the top appeal court in Alberta has dismissed an attempt by a company owning a royalty share in a coal mine to win compensation over the federal government's decision to phase-out coal power by 2030. InEurope, a landmark ruling found that the Swiss government’s inadequate response to global heating breached national obligations to protect the human rights of its citizens. This ruling will increase pressure on European countries and adds to the growing body of international law supporting stronger climate action.InOregon, the governor has signed into law a bill requiring the state pension fund to divest from thermal coal investments. In both theEuropean UnionandTexas, coal generation declined rapidly in 2023 with the commissioning of new renewable generation capacity.FeaturesWhy South Africa’s power plan won’t keep the lights onThe draft power plan produced by the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy requires substantial revisions to meet the country’s economic, environmental and social objectives,writesCrispin Olver, the Executive Director of the Presidential Climate Commission, inBusinessDay.Eskom is in a death spiral of rising prices and load-shedding – but there is hopeThe pace of reform in South Africa’s electricity supply industry is now gathering momentum, driven by the need for decarbonisation and supply security, as well as the reality of the economic imperatives,writesChris Yelland inDaily Investor.Too clever by half? How Adani’s lobbying may cost Adani Green over US$100 millionAn import duty on solar equipment that the Indian government imposed following lobbying led by the Adani Group has slowed the transition to renewables,writesAbir Dasgupta inAdani Watch.Top NewsHyundai drops Indonesian aluminium supply deal:The South Korean carmaker Hyundai has decided not to renew a memorandum of understanding with PT Adaro Indonesia to source aluminium from a smelter in North Kalimantan. Adaro proposed powering the smelter with a new 1100 megawatt (MW) coal plant. Hyundai entered into a non-binding agreement in 2022 to secure access to aluminium from Adaro’s subsidiary PT Kalimantan Aluminium Industry. Hyundai’s agreement prompted 13,000 supporters of Kpop4Planet to urge the company to end the deal.(Reuters,Mighty Earth)Alberta court rejects coal company compensation claim:Alberta’s Court of Appeal has dismissed the appeal by Altius Royalty Corporation for C$190 million (US$140 million) in compensation for the Canadian government’s decision to phase-out coal power by 2030. Altius owns a royalty interest in the Genesee coal mine, which supplied coal to three coal units at the 1346 MW Genesee coal plant. The coal units now operate on gas, and the mine has closed. Altius initiated legal action in 2018 claiming that the regulations mandating the coal phase-out amounted to the expropriation of its royalty interest in the mine. In its judgement, the Court of Appeal dismissed the company’s claim. “Canada’s prediction of the health and environmental benefits resulting from the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions describes benefits to the public, not … an ‘advantage’ flowing to the state,” the judges wrote.(Canadian Press,Court of Appeal of Alberta)European court findshuman rights obligations requires action on climate:The European Court of Human Rights has found that Switzerland failed to comply with its duties under the European Convention on Human Rights and violated Article 8, which provides citizens with the right to respect for private and family life and home. In a 16-1 ruling, the court found that Verein KlimaSeniorinnen, an association of older Swiss women, had standing to bring the case against the Swiss government. The court found there are “critical gaps” in the government’s climate response, including the failure to put in place a carbon budget and limits on national greenhouse gas emissions. The court also found that Switzerland had failed to meet its past greenhouse gas emission reduction target. The Center for International Environmental Law said the ruling will influence climate litigation across Europe and internationally. The court dismissed two other similar cases brought by a French mayor against France and a group of young Portuguese people against 32 European countries.(Guardian,European Court of Human Rights,Center for International Environmental Law)Emissions from the European power sector slumped in 2023:The European Commission revealed that greenhouse gas emissions from the region’s power sector fell by 24 per cent in 2023 on the back of rapid growth in renewables, primarily solar and wind. The commission said the increase in renewable generation is driving a decline in coal and gas generation.(Reuters,European Commission)US restores citizens’ role in mine complaints:The Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSMRE) has reversed a Trump administration policy and restored a procedure that allows citizens to report potential coal mining violations of the Surface Mining Control Reclamation and Act, such as water and dust emissions. In 24 states, OSMRE has delegated the administration of the act to state regulators. The latest changes to the ‘Ten Day Rule’ require OSMRE to determine if there is sufficient evidence to justify further investigation, and if so, require the state agency to respond within ten days to its findings. Environmental groups have welcomed the change. The National Mining Association, the peak lobby group representing mining companies, argued the change would undermine the right of the states to regulate the industry.(E & E News,Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,Sierra Club,Western Organization of Resource Councils)Abandoned Welsh mine fills with water as regulators ponder rehab plan:Residents are alarmed that the abandoned coal pit at the Ffos-y-Fran mine is filling with water while regulators and the mining company, Merthyr (South Wales) Limited, discuss a rehabilitation plan for the site. When the mine was approved in 2007, the company and regulators said the pit would be filled in and rehabilitated once mining was completed. Mining at the site ceased in November 2023. The bond held for the site is far less than the estimated cost of rehabilitation, which is between £120 million (US$151 million) and £175 million (US$220 million). In an email to two residents, Merthyr Tydfil council wrote that a revised rehabilitation plan by the company is likely to be submitted in autumn 2024 and include a permanent water body. The council informed the residents that the company has no plans to “reintroduce pumps on site to remove the water from the mining void”.(BBC)Polish utility tells workforce controversial Turow mine will keep operating:The CEO of PGE, Dariusz Marzec, has told a meeting of employees that the state-owned utility “will take all possible legal steps in the defence” of the continued operation of the controversial Turow lignite that feeds the adjoining 1950 MW power station. “We will correct previous errors and take all necessary actions to maintain the normal operation of the Turow mine and power plant with the utmost attention to ecological issues and the safety of the entire region for as long as needed,” he said. In March, the regional administrative court in Warsaw overturned an environmental permit issued in 2022 that granted permission for the Turow lignite mine to operate until 2044. The impacts of the mine on the neighbouring Czech Republic were at the centre of negotiations over a €45 million (US$57 million) compensation agreement between the two governments. Affected residents argue the deal has done little to reduce the impacts of the mine. PGE’s annual report for 2023, which was released last week, continues to value the mine and power plant on the assumption that they operate until 2044.(CeeEnergyNews,XM,PGE)Legal challenge against new Australian coal mine:The Australian Conservation Foundation and Mackay Conservation Group have launched a legal challenge in the Queensland Land Court against Whitehaven Coal’s proposed Winchester South coal mine. The groups argue that the court should recommend against granting the company a mining lease or environmental approval as the production and burning of 17 million tonnes of coal a year over 28 years would emit 583 million tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions. A hearing is not likely until early 2025. The mine was approved in early 2024 by the Queensland government but has not yet received approval by the federal government.(Brisbane Times,Australian Conservation Foundation)Sasol wins ministerial reprieve from air pollution standards:South Africa’s Minister of Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment, Barbara Creecy, has granted Sasol’s appeal against a July 2023 decision by the National Air Quality Officer to reject a proposal to change to pollution standard for the company’s Secunda coal-to-oil plant. Sasol proposed the measurement of sulphur dioxide (So2) emissions from the 17 coal boilers at the plant shift to a load-based standard instead of measuring the So2 concentration in emissions. JustShare, a shareholder advocacy group, presented expert evidence that Sasol’s preferred approach would reduce premature deaths and health impacts byonly five per cent by 2030 compared to a 40-60 per cent cut if the original Minimum Emissions Standard was met. “This decision means that the government has permitted a private company to set its own pollution limits, making a mockery of pollution laws and constitutional rights and of any claim by the government to take public health seriously,” said Just Share.(Daily Maverick,JustShare)NewsAustralia:Mercury emissions from Origin Energy’s 2880 MW Eraring power stationincreasedby 130 per cent in 2022-23, according to data from the national pollution inventory.Australia:The Federal Court of Australia hasfoundthat Peabody Energy unfairly sacked 22 workers at its Helensburgh coal mine in 2020.Bangladesh:Coal-based generation more thandoubledin 2023 from 2022.Chile:The increase in solar generation isincreasingpressure on the country’s remaining coal plants, some of which could operate until 2040.India:The Delhi High Court hassuspendedthe conviction of the former Minister of Steel, Coal and Parliamentary Affairs, Dilip Ray, so that he can run as a candidate in the Odisha legislative assembly elections. Ray was convicted in October 2020 over his role in a coal allocation scandal but has appealed the decision.US:Sam Randazzo, the former chair of the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio, has died. In February, 22 statechargeswere laid against Randazzo relating to the US$61 million FirstEnergy bribery scandal.Companies + MarketsOregon laws requires the state pension fund to divest from thermal coal:The Governor of Oregon, Tina Kotek, has signed the Clean Oregon Assets Legislation (COAL) Act into law. The legislation requires the Oregon State Treasury to ensure the Oregon Public Employee Retirement Fund does not invest further funds in companies with thermal coal exposure and divests its estimated US$1 billion in stocks held in coal companies and power utilities. Oregon is the third US state to enact fossil fuel divestment legislation, following the passage of similar bills in California and Maine.(Pensions & Investments,Stand.earth)Coal generation dips to an all-time low in Texas:Data from the Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT) indicates that coal generation in the state has dropped to record lows, slumping to just over nine per cent of generation in March. Coal generation in Texas – the second largest electricity market in the US and the state with the highest coal consumption – has slumped from more than 30 per cent in 2014 despite a rapid increase in electricity demand. Texas power utilities consumed 50.7 million US short tons (46 million tonnes) of coal in 2023, which accounted for 13 per cent of the US total. The rapid growth of wind and solar generation is a significant driver in the decline in coal generation. There is currently 22,710 MW of solar capacity in ERCOT, with another 7168 MW slated to come online this year.(Institute for Energy Economics & Financial Analysis)Major Chinese coal province aims to trim production:A Shanxi state government work plan forecasts coal production in the province of 1.3 billion tonnes in 2024, down four per cent from 1.36 billion tonnes produced in 2023. Shanxi is China’s largest coal-producing province and accounted for 29 per cent of the country’s coal production last year. Demand growth for domestic coal has slowed in part due to declining prices and reduced construction activity, which affects cement and steel production. The coal sector has also been affected by a renewed emphasis on safety, especially at smaller mines, following a spate of accidents. A coal industry group has forecast national coal production could increase by one per cent in 2024 to 4.66 billion tonnes.(Reuters)Ohio regulator urged to refund US$100 million subsidy on coal plants:The Citizens Utility Board of Ohio has urged the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio to require the three owners of two loss-making coal plants to refund US$100 million in subsidies provided under the provisio ns of House Bill 6. The legislation providing subsidies for the coal plantsis at the heart of the FirstEnergy corruption scandal. Devi Glick from Synapse Energy Economics said the three utilities that co-owned the Ohio Valley Electric Corporation (OVEC) – AEP Ohio and local affiliates of Duke Energy and AES Energy – ran the 1303 MW Clifty Creek plant in Indiana and the 1086 MW Kyger Creek coal plant in Ohio all the time rather than just when costs were lower than market prices. The Citizens Utility Board of Ohio argued Ohio electricity consumers should not have paid subsidies when the plants were run at a loss. The Public Utilities Commission of Ohio has to decide whether OVEC operated the plants “prudently” or economically.(WOSU Public Media)South Korean utility moves to co-fire coal plant with hydrogen:Korea Southern Power Company (KOSPO) has awarded a US$103 million contract to the construction arm of Samsung to build a 30,000-tonne hydrogen tank at the 2044 MW Samcheok coal plant. The project is scheduled for completion in July 2027. KOSPO has proposed that the plant could be co-fired with up to 20 per cent hydrogen mix.(The Korea Economic Daily)Coal miners in top 20 greenhouse polluters since the industrial revolution:TheCarbon Majorsreport estimates emissions from 1854 to 2022 from global fossil fuel and cement producers and attributes more than 70 per cent of total emissions to just 78 corporate and state-producing entities. The top 20 emitters include China, Coal India, the British Coal Corporation, Peabody, Poland and Russia/the Russian Federation. The report notes that since the 2015 Paris Agreement, investor-owned coal production has declined by 28 per cent, while coal production by state-owned companies and nation-states has increased by 29 per cent and 19 per cent, respectively.(Guardian,Carbon Majors [Pdf])Green Steel TransitionSwedish green steel producer eyes US plant:The Swedish green steel producer, SSAB, has been short-listed to negotiate with the US Department of Energy on up to US$500 million in funding for a  fossil-free iron plant using green hydrogen. SSAB has proposed to build the plant in Montpelier, Iowa. In 2021, SSAB unveiled plans to convert its Lulea steel plant in Sweden and its Raahe plant in Finland to electric arc furnaces and rolling mills by 2030. It also plans to convert its Borlange steel mill in Sweden and the Hameenlinna plant in Finland to operate with the HYBRIT technology based on renewables-based hydrogen production as an alternative to coal and coke.(SSAB)US Steel announces a small CCS unit for a US steelworks:US Steel has announced plans to capture 50,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide a year from the blast furnaces at its Gary steelworks in Indiana. The Gary steelworks emits over 10 million tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions a year, with the proposed carbon capture and storage (CCS) project capturing just 0.5 per cent of annual emissions. US Steel said work on the CCS plant would begin later this year and commence operation in 2026. Ben Inskeep from the Citizens Action Coalition described CCS as “a distraction” from what US Steel needs to do to cut greenhouse gas emissions. “My biggest concern is that this is essentially locking in the continued operation of their blast furnaces for decades to come,” he said.(Fast Company,US Steel,Global Energy Monitor)ResourcesA guide to India’s 2024 elections, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, April 2024.This guide provides an overview of India’s elections, with voting that will run between April 11 and May 19.Share on FacebookShare on TwitterForward to a FriendSubscribe