Campaign URLCopyTwitter0tweetsSubscribePast IssuesRSSTranslateEnglishالعربيةAfrikaansбеларуская мовабългарскиcatalà中文（简体）中文（繁體）HrvatskiČeskyDanskeesti keelNederlandsSuomiFrançaisDeutschΕλληνικήहिन्दीMagyarGaeilgeIndonesiaíslenskaItaliano日本語ភាសាខ្មែរ한국어македонски јазикبهاس ملايوMaltiNorskPolskiPortuguêsPortuguês - PortugalRomânăРусскийEspañolKiswahiliSvenskaעבריתLietuviųlatviešuslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпскиதமிழ்ภาษาไทยTürkçeFilipinoукраї́нськаTiếng ViệtApril 18, 2024Issue 510|View Past IssuesPublished byGlobal Energy MonitorEditor's NoteThe latestupdateto Global Energy Monitor’s Global Coal Plant Tracker confirms that China dwarfs all other countries when it comes to new coal plant capacity commissioned in 2023. While the rate of coal retirements slowed in 2023, the best news is that construction starts on new plants is proceeding in just six countries outside China.China’sincreasing new coal capacity comes with a sting in the tail: government measures to ensure the availability of vast quantities of coal to keep plants running during periods of high demand.InGermanyandAustralia, new data reveals that methane emissions from existing coal mines have been massively underreported. There have also been several legal wins for NGO groups contesting coal projects. InIndia, a court has ordered the Odisha government and Adani to redo community consultation on a proposed coal project. InCanada, a judge ordered the Alberta government to release thousands of records on why it overturned a decades-old policy blocking coal mining on part of the slopes of the Rocky Mountains. InAustralia, a coal company has offloaded a coal mine and port in Russia after a court upheld the validity of a regulation imposing sanctions on companies operating in the country.FeaturesCheap coal, cheap workers, Chinese money: Indonesia’s nickel success comes at a priceIndonesia’s boom in nickel processing relies on Chinese capital and cheap coal and labour. But the growth in the country’s nickel processing plants has come at a significant cost to residents, the environment and labourers,writesPer Elinder Liljas inThe Guardian.Baltimore port shutdown stokes neighbourhood pollution fears over coal stockpilesResidents of the Curtis Bay neighbourhood say they are choking on dust blowing from mountains of coal at the port,writesHannah Northey inE&ENews.How to build a ‘positive bond’ between coal and renewablesThe transition from a high-carbon energy system to a low-carbon one needn’t be a jobs bloodbath or marked by messy political battles,writesEthan van Diemen in theDaily Maverick.Coal imports surge: Adani bullish about coal in IndiaWhile the Indian government has talked up the possibility of coal imports ending by 2027, the head of Adani Natural Resources told a conference call for investors that the company said up to 150 million tonnes of coal could be imported annually for the next 15 years,writesa special correspondent forAdani Watch.Top NewsReport reveals China dominates new coal plant construction, again:Global Energy Monitor’s 2023Boom and Bustreport has found that69,500 megawatts (MW) of new coal power capacity was commissioned in 2023, with two-thirds of the total in China. Outside China, newly commissioned coal capacity is concentrated in just nine countries: Indonesia, India, Vietnam, Japan, Bangladesh, Pakistan, South Korea, Greece, and Zimbabwe. The commencement of construction on new projects is occurring in just six countries outside China: India, Indonesia, Laos, Nigeria, Pakistan, and Russia. Coal retirements were at the lowest level in over a decade due to a downturn in closures in the US and Europe. With the retirement of 21,100 MW of coal plants in 2023, the net increase in coal capacity was the highest since 2016.(Carbon Brief,Financial Times,Global Energy Monitor)South Korean election result could impact the coal sector:South Korea’s ruling conservative government led by President Yoon Suk-yeol’s People Power Party suffered a setback at the April 10 general election, with the opposition Democratic Party and allied parties winning 175 seats in the 300-member legislature. While the People Power Party and a coalition partner won 108 seats, analysts believe Yoon will struggle to have legislation supported for the remainder of his three-year term. The Democratic Alliance fell short of the 200-seat supermajority necessary to overcome legislation blocked by the President. Analysts expect the election outcome will result in increased support for renewables and gas generation. The Democratic Party has proposed increasing the country’s share of renewable electricity from the current 10 per cent to 40 per cent by 2035, primarily from wind and solar generation. After his election in 2022, Yoon emphasised nuclear generation, and the government has yet to develop a coal phase-out plan. South Korea’s current power plan assumes 41 coal-fired power plants, with a combined capacity of 31,500 MW, will still be operating in 2030.(Al Jazeera,Reuters,S & P Global)Indian court orders Adani to redo community consultation on mine:The High Court of Odisha has ordered the state government and Mahanadi Mines & Minerals, a subsidiary of Adani, to restart community consultations with tribal villagers at risk of displacement by the proposed Bijahan coal mining project. A petition submitted to the court argued that villagers were told one day before the proposed community consultation instead of the required 15 days’ notice. The court directed the Odisha government to resolve the concerns of the villagers within three months. The proposed open-cut mine would affect four villages, with the company proposing to produce over 5 million tonnes of coal a year. The mining lease for the Bijahan mine covers 1100 hectares of land, including forests used by villagers.(Adani Watch)Canadian court orders release of documents on coal policy backflip:Judge Kent Teskey has ordered the Alberta provincial government to release thousands of pages of records held by Alberta Energy on the 2020 decision to overturn the 1976 policy that prevented coal projects on the eastern slopes of the Rocky Mountains. A group of ranchers applied for the documents, but only 30 pages of 6539 records were released. In late 2023, the Information and Privacy Commissioner rejected the exemptions claimed by the agency. The Alberta government sought a judicial review of that decision, but Teskey dismissed the application and criticised the agency for reducing the number of documents under review by more than a third. The documents released so far indicate the coal industry was lobbying the United Conservative Party government well before the May 2020 announcement of the scrapping of the policy. The records released to date do not indicate the government consulted any First Nations, municipalities, environmental groups, or other organisations before the announcement of the policy change.(Calgary Herald,CBC)Documents reveal US utility’s secret US$1m donation to campaign group:Documents released by the Ohio Consumers’ Counsel to a coalition of news organisations have revealed that FirstEnergy contributed US$1 million in 2017 to a conservative group Freedom Frontier, with the contribution labelled as for the “Husted campaign”. In 2017, Jon Husted initially sought to run as a candidate for Governor but abandoned his bid and joined Mike DeWine’s ticket as a candidate for Lieutenant Governor. Eleven days after dropping his bid to run as Governor, emails revealed Husted lobbied DeWine to support the proposed bailout of FirstEnergy’s two loss-making nuclear plants. Husted declined to state whether he was aware of FirstEnergy’s contribution to Freedom Frontier, which supported his election. A spokesperson reiterated that the group wasn’t part of his campaign. While the initial focus of FirstEnergy’s campaign was a bailout for the two nuclear plants, the final legislation also provided subsidies for two coal plants.(Energy News Network,Ohio Capitol Journal)Report estimates Germany underestimates coal mine methane emissions:A report by Ember, an energy policy think tank, estimates that Germany is massively underestimating methane emissions from its coal sector. The group notes that Germany reported just 1390 tonnes of coal mine methane emissions in 2021, or just one per cent of the emissions from active coal mines in the European Union. In 2022, Germany produced 131 million tonnes of lignite, which represents 44 per cent of lignite production in the European Union. Ember estimates that, based on a comparison of methane emissions from Polish lignite, Germany’s coal mine methane emissions could be up to 184 times higher than the amount it currently reports. Germany is a signatory of the Global Methane Pledge, which commits supporters to cut methane emissions by at least 30 per cent below 2020 levels by 2030. Ember argues Germany urgently needs to overhaul its methodology for estimating coal mine methane emissions.(Energy Monitor,Ember)Satellite detects methane plumes from Glencore’s Hail Creek mine:Satellite data analysed by the Australian Conservation Foundation (ACF) revealed four plumes of methane emissions in June 2023 from Glencore’s Hail Creek coal mine in Queensland. ACF estimates that over 16 days, the Hail Creek mine emitted more than 8640 tonnes of methane, more than the company reported was emitted from the mine for the whole year. ACF noted that of the 61 methane emission plumes analysed, 41 were in areas where only coal mines operate, with a further 16 sites where both coal and gas projects operate. The report also found that EDL’s German Creek power station, which runs on gas captured from Anglo American’s shuttered Grasstree mine, vented “significant” amounts of methane on three occasions in the year. ACF called on the federal government to amend the National Greenhouse and Energy Reporting scheme to require all operating coal, oil and gas projects to measure their emissions accurately.(RenewEconomy,Australian Conservation Foundation [Pdf])NewsAustralia:Zen Energy hasproposeda 1000 MW pumped hydro project that utilises a disused coal washing pit formerly used by the Burragorang Valley Coal.Canada:Opinion polling for Wildsightindicatesstrong support for the Canadian government to require financial guarantees on clean-up costs of Elk Valley mines before any decision allowing Glencore to takeover Teck Resources coal operations.Chile:Engie plans to spend US$180 million toconvertits former Tocopilla coal plant into a 116 MW standalone battery energy storage system.New Zealand:The new governmentwillrelax permitting for new and expanding coal mines.Pakistan:The Sindh Energy Department willdrafta policy on the gasification of Thar lignite deposits.Poland:Metallurgical coal producer JSWestimatesproduction will fall by 850,000 tonnes in 2024 after fires at its KWK Budryk and KWK Pniowek mines.Philippines:Clean Air Asiacalledon the government to tighten the “outdated” air pollution standards in the Philippine Clean Air Act.South Africa:The Mbombela High Courthearda legal challenge from a coalition of NGOs against a decision to revoke a large part of the Mabola Protected Environment to allow a new coal mine.Ukraine:A Russian missile attackdestroyedthe 1800 MW Trypilska coal and gas-fired power plant in  Kyiv, one of the country’s largest.US:Democratic Kentucky Governor Andy Beshear hasvetoeda bill aimed at making it harder for utilities to retire coal and other fossil fuel plants. Republican MPs have vowed to overturn the veto.US:The EDF, an environmental NGO,calledon the Environmental Protection Agency to close the “lignite loophole” that allows lignite power plants to emit more than three times the mercury pollution of other coal plants.Companies + MarketsChina state planner to establish thermal coal reserve scheme:The powerful National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) – China’s central economic planning agency – has agreed to establish a reserve thermal coal mining capacity mechanism by 2027. In December 2023, the NDRC proposed that the mechanism would have about 300 million tonnes of “dispatchable” capacity on call for when domestic prices exceed a “reasonable” range. The NRDC said the mechanism would prioritise mines in Shanxi, Inner Mongolia, Shaanxi and Xinjiang. Since a power generation crisis in 2021, triggered in part by power utilities cutting unprofitable generation when coal prices climbed, the central government has placed increased emphasis on energy security. The latest National Bureau of Statistics data indicates that coal production in the first quarter of 2024 was 1.11 billion tonnes, down 4.1 per cent due to falling prices and weak demand.(Mining.com,Business Recorder)Australian company offloads Russian mine after sanctions ruling:The Federal Court of Australia has dismissed a legal challenge by Tigers Realm Coal against sanctions imposed by the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) after the Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022. DFAT has imposed sanctions on companies in critical sectors likely to benefit the Russian government financially. In April 2023, DFAT advised Tigers Realm Coal that it was “likely” in breach of the sanctions, with Russian media reporting the company declined to sell its projects to local investors. The company commissioned the Amaan metallurgical coal project in Russia’s Far East, which began exporting coal in mid-2017. In the wake of the court ruling, Tigers Realm Coal sold its Russian coal mine, port and mining licences for US$49 million to APM-Invest, a private company owned by Russian mining investor Mark Buzuk.(SBS,Federal Court of Australia,Tigers Realm Coal [Pdf])Pakistan wants Chinese support to convert imported coal plants to lignite:Pakistan’s Prime Minister, Shehbaz Sharif, has directed the Ministry of Planning to raise the government’s interest in converting the three Chinese-owned imported coal power plants to run on domestic coal with China’s National Development and Reform Commission. Pakistan estimates that converting the three plants, which have a combined capacity of 3960 MW, would save US$800 million on the cost of coal. The National Electric Power Regulatory Authority states in its latest annual review that the high costs of power are a significant drag on the country’s economic performance. The conversion of the plants to use low-grade domestic lignite would impose substantial costs on current owners, and the expansion of the Thar lignite mines would also require funding. The mines have already had a significant impact on the water supply of residents.(Express Tribune)US coal exports to fall due to bridge disaster:The US Energy Information Administration (EIA) estimates US coal exports will fall by about six per cent in 2024 due to the collapse of the bridge in Baltimore. The collapse of the bridge has blocked access to the two upstream coal export terminals. The EIA estimates US coal exports of 94 million US short tons (85 million tonnes) in 2024, down from 101 million US short tons (92 million tonnes) in 2023. The EIA estimates coal exports will be down by about one-third in April and 20 per cent in May. Baltimore is the second-largest export port for US coal, hosting the Curtis Bay Coal Piers and CONSOL Energy’s Baltimore Marine terminal. The terminals handle coal from coalfields in northern Appalachia, western Pennsylvania and northern West Virginia. About two-thirds of the coal exported from Baltimore is thermal coal.(Reuters,US Energy Information Administration)Polish government scraps plan to shift coal assets to taxpayers:Poland’s Minister for Industry, Marzena Czarnecka, has confirmed the new government will abandon the previous administration’s plan to shift state-owned coal mines and coal plants to the National Energy Security Agency (NABE). The last government decided to offload the coal assets of PGE, Tauron, and Enea to the taxpayer-backed NABE and allow them to operate up to 2049. This previous government wanted to shift the coal plants to NABE to enable the utilities to attract green financing for renewable projects. Czarnecka said the new government is considering linking coal plants with specific mines.(BNE Intellinews,Mining.com)ResourcesBoom and Bust Coal 2024, Global Energy Monitor, April 2024. (Pdf) (The executive summary ishere. Translations are available inFrench,Hindi,Spanish,Russian,Turkish,Chinese,Vietnamese,Portuguese,Korean,Japanese,IndonesianandBengali.)This 69-page report provides a detailed global overview of new coal capacity and the rate of retirement of existing coal power plants.Global Steel Plant TrackerandGlobal Blast Furnace Tracker, Global Energy Monitor, April 2024.The Global Steel Plant Tracker and the Global Blast Furnace Tracker have been updated, with new summary tables available for download. The steel plant tracker includes every operating iron and steel plant with a capacity of more than 500,000 tonnes a year. The blast furnace tracker profiles each blast furnace at plants in the Global Steel Plant Tracker.“Managed transition vehicle: Financing mechanism for early phase-down of Chinese-sponsored coal plants”, Griffith Asia Institute, April 9, 2024.This policy brief proposes utilising the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor to finance the early retirement of existing coal-fired power plants and accelerate the development of renewable capacity.Share on FacebookShare on TwitterForward to a FriendSubscribe