Campaign URLCopyTwitter0tweetsSubscribePast IssuesRSSTranslateEnglishالعربيةAfrikaansбеларуская мовабългарскиcatalà中文（简体）中文（繁體）HrvatskiČeskyDanskeesti keelNederlandsSuomiFrançaisDeutschΕλληνικήहिन्दीMagyarGaeilgeIndonesiaíslenskaItaliano日本語ភាសាខ្មែរ한국어македонски јазикبهاس ملايوMaltiNorskPolskiPortuguêsPortuguês - PortugalRomânăРусскийEspañolKiswahiliSvenskaעבריתLietuviųlatviešuslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпскиதமிழ்ภาษาไทยTürkçeFilipinoукраї́нськаTiếng ViệtApril 25, 2024Issue 511|View Past IssuesPublished byGlobal Energy MonitorEditor's NoteWhile Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi is ahead in the polls and expected to win the country’s general election, the persistent controversies over Adani Group operations won’t help his campaign. In his 2014 campaign, Modi famously jetted around the country in an Adani jet. This week,Reutersreported that India’s securities regulator found that a dozen offshore funds that invested in Adani Group companies had breached investment limits and disclosure rules. In a separate development, an Adani company hasswitcheda high-priced power purchase agreement for an imported coal plant that didn’t proceed over to a lower-cost plant elsewhere in the state using domestic coal. For those interested in theIndian elections,Carbon Briefhas produced a helpful assessment of the energy and climate policies of the major parties.In other news, two academic studies throw new light on the health impacts of coal power and transport. Astudyhas found that if Indian coal plants operating since 2010 had pollution control equipment to cut sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions, up to 720,000 lives would have been saved. A newUS studyhas found dust emissions from coal wagons result in increased rates of asthma, heart disease, hospitalisation and death for residents near railway lines. The authors also note that the topic is little researched, with potentially significant public health implications for countries such as India and China, where there is a heavy reliance on rail transport of coal.FeaturesPowering down: end times for the UK’s final coal-fired stationAt Ratcliffe-on-Soar in Nottinghamshire, the turbines will stop spinning for good this year as the UK meets its pledge to ban coal use,writesJillian Ambrose inThe Guardian.South Africa’s electricity crisis: a series of failures over 30 years have left a dim legacyIf the South African government wants to avoid the mistakes of the past, it must decisively shift towards a renewable energy economy,writesProfessor Mark Swilling from Stellenbosch University inThe Conversation.Adani awarded colossal Indian coal deposit despite low bidIn March 2024, Adani won the mining rights for the billion-tonne Mara II Mahan coal block in Madhya Pradesh after it failed at an earlier auction at which it was the only bidder,writesAyaskant Das inAdani Watch.CampaignsContract cancelled for lignite plant in Bosnia and HerzegovinaElektroprivreda BiH, a state-owned utility, has confirmed the cancellation of the construction contract for the proposed 450 MW Tuzla 7 lignite unit in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Elektroprivreda BiH proposed the unit in 2011  but struggled to progress the project despite initial financial support from China Exim Bank and signing a construction contract with China Gezhouba Group. Civil society groups, including Bankwatch and CAN Europe, campaigned against the environmental permit for the project and challenged the legality of a state-backed financial guarantee for the loan. Elektroprivreda BiH repeatedly informed Gezhouba in 2023 of its intention to terminate the construction contract. Despite Prime Minister Nermin Niksic confirming in late 2023 that the project would not proceed, there was continued uncertainty about the Gezhouba contract.(Biznis.ba [Bosnian],Global Energy Monitor)Top NewsPollution controls on Indian plants could have saved up to 720,000 lives:Researchers from India and the US estimate that the Indian government could have avoided between 220,000 and 720,000 deaths if all coal power units operating after 2010 had installed pollution control units to cut sulphur dioxide (SO2) and nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions. The study, published inAir Quality, Atmosphere and Health,estimated the installation of flue gas desulphurisation and selective catalytic reduction control technology could have cut the mean annual PM2.5 fine particle pollution concentrations across India by 11 per cent. The study found that the adoption of pollution control technologies would cut PM2.5 fine particle pollution by 7–28 per cent for the communities closest to coal plants and could reduce premature mortality by up to 17 per cent. In 2015, India’s Ministry of Environment adopted new pollution control standards to cut SO2 and NOx emissions, with an initial compliance deadline of December 2017. Opposition to the standards by power utilities has resulted in repeated delays, with many units still operating without SO2 and NOx pollution controls. The study notes that despite utilities claims of the high cost of pollution controls, policy measures to cut pollution are “economically justifiable”.(Guardian,Air Quality, Atmosphere and Health)US study finds health impacts from coal dust pollution from rail wagons:A study by University of California researchers has found higher rates of asthma, heart disease, hospitalisation and death for residents living near rail lines in the San Francisco Bay area used to transport coal from mines in Utah. The study, published in the journalEnvironmental Research,modelled the potential health impact of train transport for an additional 7.4 million US short tons (6.7 million tonnes) to the proposed Oakland coal terminal, a project at the centre of protracted opposition and legal challenges since 2015. The study estimated that increased coal train traffic would expose about 262,000 people to some increase in PM2.5 fine particle air pollution. In a mid-range exposure scenario, the study estimated three to seven extra deaths a year and increased admissions for chronic lung disease, congestive heart failure, pneumonia, stroke and cardiovascular disease. The study also noted the global lack of studies on the health impacts of pollution from coal trains despite the widespread use of uncovered coal trains to transport large volumes of coal.(Mining.com,Environmental Research)Russian authorities under pressure to cut coal dust at Murmansk port:The Governor of Murmansk, Andrei Chibis, has confirmed that complaints by residents about coal dust from the Murmansk Commercial Seaport have increased fifteenfold in the last year. The Russian coal company SUEK owns the port. Coal dust from the terminal discolours snow and cloaks the surrounding area with a film of fine dust. Coal accounts for about 80 per cent of the volume shipped through the port, with exports increasing since Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine as the coal industry responded to European Union sanctions by focussing on sales to Asian customers. SUEK said it would improve dust controls after Chibis called on state prosecutors to investigate the port company for potential violations of its operating licence. Murmansk port can handle up to 18 million tonnes of coal a year.(Moscow Times)Documents reveal utility payments to support Ohio governor’s campaign:Newly released Public Utilities Commission of Ohio documents have shown that FirstEnergy contributed US$2.5 million to State Solutions, a non-profit group affiliated with the Republican Governors Association that backed the 2018 campaign for governor by Mike DeWine. The records revealed that then-FirstEnergy CEO Chuck Jones stated that DeWine winning the campaign was “critical” to the utility “from both a legislative and regulatory perspective”. DeWine wond the election. FirstEnergy, which has admitted to its role in the US$61 million Ohio corruption scandal, benefitted from a legislated US$1.3 billion bailout for two nuclear plants. The Ohio legislature also included two coal plants in the 2019 subsidy scheme. Charges were laid against Jones and seven others over a range of state and federal offences, with the former Republican Speaker in the Ohio House of Representatives sentenced in 2023 to 20 years in jail for his role in the scandal. FirstEnergy. A spokesperson said DeWine’s position in support of nuclear power was well known before FirstEnergy’s contributions to groups that supported his campaign.(Floodlight News)China finally considers draft energy law:China’s draft energy law has been submitted by the State Council to the National People’s Congress Standing Committee for review in Beijing this week. The law is intended to guide China’s shift to a low-carbon economy and also covers state measures to protect investors in overseas energy projects. An anonymous professor from Tsinghua University attributed the long delay in the development of the law to opposition from the energy sector, which lobbied to limit the scope of the law. “I think the anti-corruption campaign in the past decade, which brought down many key officials in the energy authorities and state-owned companies, is one major element that broke the staunch resistance,” the professor said. In Jiangxi province, Li Dong, former deputy general manager of CHN Energy, the parent company of China Shenhua Energy Company, has pleaded guilty to accepting money and other valuables worth 108 million yuan (US$15.20 million). Prosecutors alleged Li accepted the funds and items from coal suppliers and others between 1999 and 2023.(South China Morning Post,China Daily)NewsAustralia:Delta Electricity, which operates the 1320 MW Vales Point Power Station in New South Wales, has pleadednot guiltyto incorrectly operating its chlorine dosing plant in September 2022 and causing a mass fish kill.Global:More than 1000 public relations and advertising agencies havepledgedto rule out working on the accounts of fossil fuel firms.India:The National Green Tribunal (NGT) hasdirectedthe Haryana Power Generation Corporation to submit details on its management of coal ash at the closed 165 MW Faridabad power station.Poland:The World Bankwill lendPoland 1.1 billion zloty (US$266 million) to finance the government’s “Clean Air” programme to cut coal use for home heating in favour of cleaner alternatives such as heat pumps and energy efficiency upgrades.South Africa:More than 31,000 peoplesigneda Greenpeace Africa petition opposing the Department of Mineral Resources and Mining’s decision granting a coal mining licence for a site next to the Rietvlei Nature Reserve.Taiwan:Air Clean Taiwan hascalledfor the closure of the 5780 MW Taichung Power Plant by 2028. Taipower currently plans to operate the plant until 2035.US:The Montana Environmental Information Center hassuedthe Department of Justice for access to its communications with Teck Coal since the start of 2022. Water pollution from Teck Coal’s Canadian mines is adversely affecting US waterways and tribal rights.US:A Virginia Democrat hasproposedamending the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 to increase monitoring of ground and surface waters around coal mines.Companies + MarketsIndian securities regulator found breaches by Adani companies:The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) has reportedly found that 12 offshore funds that invested in Adani Group companies breached investment limits and disclosure rules. Two officials with knowledge of the investigation spoke toReuterson condition of anonymity. Companies breaching the disclosure requirements and investment limits can be fined up to 10 million rupees (US$120,000) for each violation and potentially banned from trading on Indian stock markets. The SEBI investigation followed the January 2023 accusations by the US-based short-seller Hindenberg Research that Adani Group companies had engaged in stock manipulation.Reutersreported that after SEBI requested an explanation from the 12 funds found to have breached regulatory standards, eight requested settlement of the charges by payment of a fine without admitting guilt. Adani and SEBI did not respond to requests for comment.(Reuters,The Wire)Adani switches Indian power purchase agreement:After community opposition stalled the development of Adani’s proposed 1320 MW Pench coal plant in Madhya Pradesh, the regulator approved switching the Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) for the plant to the company’s 1200 MW Mahan plant elsewhere in the state. The Pench project, which was first proposed in 1987 and then revived by Adani in 2010, was intended to run on imported coal from South Africa and Indonesia. With imported coal costing more than domestic supplies, the PPA between the Madhya Pradesh Power Management Company and Pench Thermal Energy set a price of 4.78 rupees per kWh (US$0.057 per kWh). In July 2023, the Adani Group sought approval from the Madhya Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission (MPERC) to transfer the PPA for the Pench project to the Mahan plant. MPERC approved the change, which represents a windfall gain for Adani compared to the existing tariff of 3.2 rupees per kWh (US0.038 per kWh) for the Mahan plant. Adani is proposing to expand the Mahan plant to 4800 MW with coal supplied from the company’s mines.(Adani Watch)US credit rating agencies turn sour on coal exposure:An Institute for Energy Economics & Financial Analysis review of US credit rating agencies positions on fossil fuels has found the three leading agencies – Moody’s Investor Services, Standard and Poor’s and Fitch Ratings – have shifted their position over the last 20 years to rate coal exposure as a credit negative. The report charts the decline of the ratings agencies’ enthusiasm for coal projects as community and regulator concerns drove cancellations of proposed US projects. The report argues that the growing opposition to new and existing plants from local groups and the Sierra Club pushed the rating agencies to downgrade their assessment of the prospects for coal consumption and financial risks associated with power utilities. Declining US gas prices eroded coal’s share of generation, with the emergence of renewables from 2017 undercutting the previous price advantage of gas.(Institute for Energy Economics & Financial Analysis [Pdf])Australian coal company abandons driverless trucks trial at mine:Whitehaven Coal, Australia’s largest pure-play coal mining company, has abandoned its trial of Hitachi driverless haul trucks at its Maules Creek open-cut mine. In July 2018, Whitehaven announced an agreement to trial the use of remote-controlled vehicles. Driverless trucks accounted for about 60 per cent of the fleet at the mine in 2023. Whitehaven CEO Paul Flynn said the inability to integrate autonomous and staffed trucks in the confined space of the mine increased the costs of the operation. With a change in operations to dispose of waste rock in the mine void, the attraction of using driverless trucks diminished. In April, Whitehaven bought the Daunia mine in Queensland from BMA, a joint venture between BHP and Mitsubishi Development. The Daunia mine is fully autonomous using a fleet of 34 Caterpillar driverless trucks. Flynn said the company remains committed to using autonomous equipment at other mine sites.(Australian Mine Safety Journal,Whitehaven Coal [Pdf])Australian company’s plane to sell Russian assets faces scrutiny:Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade is scrutinising the decision of Tigers Realm Coal to sell its Russian coal mines and port for $US49 million to APM Invest, a company owned by Russian mining investor Mark Buzuk. Shareholders will vote on the proposed sale at the company’s May 28 annual general meeting. Clancy Moore from Transparency International Australia notes that a decision by shareholders to sell the mines and port to APM Invest would financially benefit the Russian Direct Investment Fund (RDIF), which holds an 8.41 per cent stake in Tigers Realm Coal. Australia’s sanctions ban transactions that financially benefit designated individuals, companies and government agencies. The US Treasury has stated that RDIF, Russia’s sovereign wealth fund, is “widely considered a slush fund” for Russian President Vladimir Putin.(Brisbane Times)Green Steel TransitionReport argues carbon capture won’t save steel industry:The Institute for Energy Economics & Financial Analysis (IEEFA ) notes that of the 392 Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) projects listed in the Global CCS Institute’s November stocktake, just four are in the steel sector. The only operational steel sector CCS project is the Al Reyadah plant, which captures carbon dioxide from a direct reduced iron plant operated by Emirates Steel Arkan. This plant has been operating for seven years, and IEEFA estimates that assuming it was operating at its full capacity of 800,000 tonnes a year, it captured less than 20 per cent of emissions in 2020 and 2021. IEEFA says the lack of any commercial-scale CCS plants for coal-based blast furnace-based steelmaking suggests the technology is unlikely to make inroads in the sector. The report notes that Emirates Steel Arkan is now establishing a pilot project to use green hydrogen to fuel a DRI plant with an electric arc furnace.(Institute for Energy Economics & Financial Analysis)ResourcesGlobal Coal Mine Tracker, Global Energy Monitor, April 2024. (The summary tables arehere.)The April 2024 update of the Global Coal Mine Tracker now includes 6,646 coal mines, with many more in China now included. The new summary tables also include a new sheet for all coal mines that closed between 2015 and 2023.“India election 2024: What the manifestos say on energy and climate change”,Carbon Brief, April 18, 2024.This guide reviews the energy and climate policies of India’s main political parties. India’s general election runs from April 19 to June 1.“What’s going on with China these days?”Volts, April 17, 2024. (The audio file is available as an MP3 file or a transcript ishere.)US energy commentator David Roberts, the host of theVoltspodcast, had a conversation with Lauri Myllyvirta from the Centre for Research on Energy and Clean Air on energy trends in China. The conversation runs for one hour and six minutes.“No Man’s Land”,World Press Photo Contest, 2024.The judges of the World Press Photo Contest 2024 selected Daniel Chatard’s photo essayNo Man’s Landas one of 33 winners in the competition. The photo essay documents protests against coal mining in Germany.Share on FacebookShare on TwitterForward to a FriendSubscribe