Campaign URLCopyTwitter0tweetsSubscribePast IssuesRSSTranslateEnglishالعربيةAfrikaansбеларуская мовабългарскиcatalà中文（简体）中文（繁體）HrvatskiČeskyDanskeesti keelNederlandsSuomiFrançaisDeutschΕλληνικήहिन्दीMagyarGaeilgeIndonesiaíslenskaItaliano日本語ភាសាខ្មែរ한국어македонски јазикبهاس ملايوMaltiNorskPolskiPortuguêsPortuguês - PortugalRomânăРусскийEspañolKiswahiliSvenskaעבריתLietuviųlatviešuslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпскиதமிழ்ภาษาไทยTürkçeFilipinoукраї́нськаTiếng ViệtMay 16, 2024Issue 514|View Past IssuesPublished byGlobal Energy MonitorEditor's NoteWith the criticism of Japan once more dragging its feet at the recent G7 summit on committing to an end date for coal generation, it’s no surprise that J-POWER, the country’s second-largest power utility, resorted to greenwashing with its latestannouncementon future closures. The announcement that two coal units would close by the end of the decade was not really news, with the utility previously announcing it would shut its old units by the end of the decade. The two units in question will be about 60 years old when they finally close. While the closures will be welcome, it is just as pertinent to ask what took J-POWER so long. Beyond the closures, J-POWER continues to pursue co-firing coal plants with hydrogen, ammonia, biomass, and carbon capture and storage. In other words, J-POWER is proposing yet more delays in closing coal plants.J-POWER is not the only company with coal interests that indulges in greenwashing and delay. A new report finds thatArcelorMittal, the world’s second-largest steel producer, is backtracking on previous plans to pursue the development of clean steel. With utilities in thePhilippinescontinuing to push for new coal plants, a study of the source of power outages is timely. It found that faults at coal plants – including new units – are behind many of the outages affecting consumers.FeaturesThe man who took on the coal industry to save a forest - and wonGoldman prizewinner Alok Shukla was one of the founders of the Save Hasdeo Aranya Resistance Committee – an informal alliance of grassroots movements – that has had remarkable success in protecting the Hasdeo Aranya forest in Chhattisgarh,writesFlora Drury in theBBC.Turow would avert many disasters by saying goodbye to coalThe protracted dispute over the fate of the Turow coal plant and associated mine in Poland highlights the need for a comprehensive, just transition plan involving all affected parties,arguesthe Beyond Fossil Fuels campaign.Top NewsEngie to end coal generation in Chile by 2026:Engie has requested authorisation from Chile’s National Energy Commission to cease operating two coal units at the Andina-Hornitos power station in northern Chile by December 31, 2025. Engie currently operates the 177 megawatt (MW) Central Termoeléctrica (CTA) Andina coal unit and the 178 MW CTA Hornitos coal unit. Engie commissioned the units in 2011 and 2012, respectively. In 2022, Engie shut down two 132 MW coal units at the Tocopilla power station. Once the two units at the Andina-Hornitos plant have closed, Engie will no longer have any coal capacity in Chile.(America Economia,BNAmericas)Solar surges past wind; new coal generation outpaced by renewables:TheGlobal Electricity Review 2024, published by energy think tank Ember, estimates rapid growth in solar and wind generation, especially in China, pushed renewables to 30 per cent of electricity generation in 2023. The report notes that solar and wind generation has increased from 0.2 per cent in 2000 to 13.4 per cent in 2023, with China accounting for 51 per cent of new solar generation and 60 per cent of additional wind generation. Ember notes that solar exceeded new generation from wind and supplied twice as much additional electricity in 2023 as coal plants. The report notes that the rapid growth in solar installations in late 2023 means that there will be an even more significant increase in solar generation in 2024.(Reuters,Ember)Russian court accepts appeal against current climate policy:The Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation will hear an appeal by Ecodefense and 18 environmental, indigenous and human rights activists against the constitutionality of a decree on climate policy issued by Russian President Vladimir Putin. The decree and associated strategy for the development of the Russian Federation issued in November 2020 are the primary documents setting the national greenhouse gas emissions strategy to 2050. The appeal argues that the current plan is for emissions to increase rather than reduce to meet Russia’s obligations under the Paris Agreement. Ecodefence co-chair Vladimir Slivyak is currently in exile in Germany. According to the Global Coal Plant Tracker, Russia currently has 37,857 MW of operating coal plants, with another 285 MW unit under construction. On current plans, only 3651 MW of old coal capacity will be retired by 2030.(Ecodefence [Russian])Japanese utility sets closure dates for two old coal plants:J-POWER, a major Japanese electric utility, announced it will close two aging 250 MW units at the Takasago coal plant late this decade. J-POWER commissioned the Takasago coal units in July 1968 and January 1969, respectively, and they will be almost 60 years old at closure. J-POWER also announced that the 700 MW Unit 3 at the Takehara coal plant and the 1000 MW Unit 2 at the Matsuura coal plant would either be closed or converted to reserve capacity in 2030. In 2020, J-POWER announced that it would close most of its older coal plants by 2030. “We deemed it necessary to demonstrate to shareholders our strategy for coal power plants on a site-by-site or unit-by-unit basis,” President Hitoshi Kanno told reporters. In a report to investors, the utility suggested it would increase biomass co-firing at the 600 MW Unit 1 at the Takehara coal plant and co-fire the 2030 MW Tachibana coal plant with ammonia. J-POWER suggests that some plants could run on ammonia or hydrogen or be retrofitted with carbon capture and storage in the late 2030s. J-POWER also has a 35 per cent stake in the 2000 MW Batang coal plant in Indonesia.(The Japan Times,J-POWER [Pdf - Page 10]Adani Power proposes a 3200 MW expansion of Indian coal plant:Adani Power has filed an application with India’s Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change for a 3200 MW expansion of its existing 1320 MW Kawai coal plant in Rajasthan. Adani is proposing to add four 800 MW coal units at a cost of up to US$5.6 billion. The existing plant was commissioned in 2013. The approval of the ministry is likely due to the company already owning the land. The project would require an additional 12.9 million tonnes of coal a year and 56 million cubic metres of extra water in what is a low-rainfall area in northern India. The expansion is a significant part of Adani Power’s plans to add 7720 MW of new coal capacity to its existing 15,250 MW fleet of coal plants.(Adani Watch)Legal challenge against US EPA power plant rule:A coalition of 27 US states led by West Virginia has filed a legal challenge against an Environmental Protection Agency rule regulating greenhouse gas emissions from coal and gas power plants. The rule requires plants planning to operate beyond January 1, 2039, to use carbon capture and storage technology to cut greenhouse gas emissions by 90 per cent from January 1, 2032. The Edison Electric Institute, a lobby group representing utilities including Duke Energy, AES, Entergy and American Electric Power, argues that CCS is “not yet ready for full-scale, economy-wide deployment” and complains that there is insufficient time “to permit, finance, and build the CCS infrastructure needed for compliance by 2032”. The rule requires existing coal plants slated to close by 2039 to comply with an emission standard equal to 40 per cent co-firing with gas by January 1, 2030. West Virginia plans to seek a court order suspending the rule until the legal challenges are resolved.(BNN Bloomberg)NewsAustralia:The Maules Creek Community Council ischallengingthe failure of the New South Wales Environment Protection Authority to consider licence conditions requiring Whitehaven Coal to reduce methane emissions from its Maules Creek mine.Australia:More than 100 Queensland coal mine workers have beenurgedto redo lung examinations after the first round of testing was found to be “substandard”.India:A retired judgeappointedby the High Court of Meghalaya has highlighted the lack of rehabilitation of areas damaged by ‘rat-hole’ coal mining.India:About 200,000 residents in the Asansol-Raniganj area live with the risk ofsubsidencedue to underground coal mining.Poland:Two minersdied, and another is missing after a roof collapse at PGG’s Myslowice-Wesola coal mine in Katowice.Companies + MarketsStudy finds Philippines coal plants account for most power outages:An analysis of power plant outages in the Philippines between 2019 and 2023 found that coal and gas-fired plants are the leading causes of blackouts. The study by the Center for Energy, Ecology, and Development (CEED) found that the most common causes of outages were equipment failures, such as problems with the boilers, water leaks and turbines. Of the eight most unreliable plants, six were coal plants. These plants have experienced at least 10 forced outages each since 2019. The study found that outages weren’t necessarily related to the age of the unit. CEED points to the 118-day outage at the three-year-old Unit 3 of San Miguel Power Corp’s MPPCL Coal Power Plant and 26 forced outages at MERALCO’s four-year-old 528 MW San Buenaventura coal plant. The study found that 52 per cent of forced outages over the 2019-23 period originated at coal plants.(PhilStar.com,Center for Energy, Ecology, and Development)Chinese banks dominate list of coal funders in 2023:The annualBanking on Climate Chaosreport by the Rainforest Action Network (RAN) and a coalition of NGOs estimates that the world’s largest 60 banks provided US$705 billion in loans and underwriting to fossil fuel companies in 2023, with CITIC alone providing US$7.6 billion for coal mining. The report found that US$42.5 billion in financing was provided to 211 coal mining companies in 2023, with 81 per cent from Chinese banks. The amount provided to coal mining companies increased slightly in 2022. RAN estimates US$2.54 billion flowed to metallurgical coal mining projects, a slight increase on the previous year, with CITIC, China Everbright Group, Bank of America, and Ping An Insurance Group as the largest funders. The report estimates that companies involved in coal power generation received US$80.4 billion, with 65 per cent originating from Chinese banks. Financial support for the coal power sector is down slightly from the year before. The report notes that in 2023, the Bank of America began to water down its climate policies and is now the only major US bank without restrictions on thermal coal mining or coal power plants.(NBC News,Rainforest Action Network [Pdf])Indian coal imports surge as power demand increases rapidly:India’s coal imports for the year to the end of March 2024 – the end of India’s financial year – increased by 7.7 per cent to 268 million tonnes, up from 249 million tonnes the year before. The increase in imports reflects lower prices in the seaborne export market, expectations of strong electricity demand over the summer months and a marginal increase in demand for metallurgical coal. Thermal coal demand was 176 million tonnes compared to 162 million tonnes the year before. Domestic coal production reached 997 million tonnes in the 2024 financial year, up 11.65 per cent on the year before. While thermal coal imports by state-owned utilities for blending with domestic production declined by almost one-third, private coastal plants designed to run on imported coal increased imports by 104 per cent to 104 to 41.81 million tonnes. The Central Electricity Authority directed these private plants to operate at full capacity.(PSUConnect,Financial Express)Indian coal imports surge as power demand increases rapidly:India’s coal imports for the year to the end of March 2024 – the end of India’s financial year – increased by 7.7 per cent to 268 million tonnes, up from 249 million tonnes the year before. The increase in imports reflects lower prices in the seaborne export market, expectations of strong electricity demand over the summer months and a marginal increase in demand for metallurgical coal. Thermal coal demand was 176 million tonnes compared to 162 million tonnes the year before. Domestic coal production reached 997 million tonnes in the 2024 financial year, up 11.65 per cent on the year before. While thermal coal imports by state-owned utilities for blending with domestic production declined by almost one-third, private coastal plants designed to run on imported coal increased imports by 104 per cent to 104 to 41.81 million tonnes. The Central Electricity Authority directed these private plants to operate at full capacity, with fuel costs passed through to wholesale buyers.(PSUConnect,Financial Express)South Africa pitches for funding despite stalled coal retirements:The South African government wants the funders of the US$9.3 billion Just Energy Transition Partnership (JETP) to agree at a June meeting to delay coal closures. When the JETP was announced in 2021, the funding was agreed to on the basis of supporting Eskom with coal plant closures outlined in the 2019 power development plan. Since then, Eskom has backtracked on the scheduled closures with a new draft power plan by the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy proposing no further coal plant closures this decade.Bloombergreports that South Africa will propose the closure of the Camden, Grootvlei and Hendrina coal plants between 2027 and 2030, several years later than the original proposal. The Presidential Climate Commission (PCC), a government advisory body, has warned that the draft Integrated Resources Plan (IRP) 2023 suggests load-shedding will remain until 2030 after cutting new renewables capacity from 15,200 MW to 8000 MW. Ahead of South Africa’s general elections on 29 May 2024, some parties have been campaigning against coal closures and for new gas and nuclear capacity.(Bloomberg [paywall])Report says salvaging Indonesia’s power utility requires renewables:Indonesia’s National Energy Council, an agency responsible for coordinating the country’s energy policy, is considering lowering the country’s renewable energy target from 23 per cent by 2030 to between 17 and 19 per cent. The downgrade in renewables target comes as the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources recently issued a regulation abolishing the obligation of the state-owned utility PLN to purchase electricity exported to the grid from privately owned solar installations. As a result of onerous power purchase agreements entered into by PLN for electricity from coal-based private power projects, the utility is now reliant on ongoing financial support from the government. The Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis (IEEFA) estimates Indonesia has added only 574 MW of solar capacity and 154 MW of wind capacity. IEEFA argues the government’s emphasis on propping up PLN with subsidies to offset its heavy liabilities for coal power purchase agreements is a drain on the budget when a steady increase in new renewables capacity would reduce the financial stress on the utility.(Institute for Energy Economics & Financial Analysis)Anglo American flags spinoff of metallurgical coal assets:Anglo American has rejected BHP’s revised £34 billion (US$43 billion) takeover bid for the company and instead proposed a significant restructuring, including the sale of its metallurgical coal projects. The day after rejecting BHP’s revised bid, Anglo American announced is “currently responding to strong buyer interest” in its metallurgical coal assets. Anglo American’s metallurgical coal mines in Australia – Moranbah North, Grosvenor, Dawson, Capcoal and Aquila – produced 16 million tonnes of coal in 2023. Anglo American is the world’s third-largest metallurgical coal exporter.(Guardian,Anglo American)Green Steel TransitionArcelorMittal accused of backtracking on clean steel commitment:A review by SteelWatch, an NGO tracking the greening of the steel sector, has accused ArcelorMittal of backtracking on its own stated commitments to pursue near-zero emissions steel. SteelWatch argues the company does not have scientifically-based greenhouse gas emissions reduction target in line with a 1.5C climate scenario. ArcelorMittal is the world’s second-largest steel producer, with iron and steel-making operations in 20 countries. ArcelorMittal’s decarbonisation strategy focuses on “Smart Carbon”, marginally reducing emissions from coal-based blast furnace operations, and “Innovative DRI”, producing direct reduced iron as a step in producing lower carbon steel. SteelWatch says that where ArcelorMittal initially committed to the use of renewables-powered hydrogen production, the company has backtracked to embrace gas-based hydrogen. SteelWatch also argues that ArcelorMittal paid US$11 billion in dividends to its shareholders between 2021 and 2023, 22 times more than the US$500 million the company invested in decarbonisation during the same period.(SteelWatch [Pdf])Resources“Q&A: What do India’s elections mean for coal communities and climate change?”,CarbonBrief,May 13, 2024.This article provides a handy overview of the Modi government’s policies promoting the expansion of coal mining, coal power generation and renewables.“Compensating affected parties necessary for rapid coal phase-out but expensive if extended to major emitters”,Nature Communications, May 7, 2024.This paper finds that current funding for just transition schemes most commonly supports national and regional governments and, to a lesser extent, companies involved in the transition. It also finds that a small portion of funds is provided directly to workers.Share on FacebookShare on TwitterForward to a FriendSubscribe