Campaign URLCopyTwitter0tweetsSubscribePast IssuesRSSTranslateEnglishالعربيةAfrikaansбеларуская мовабългарскиcatalà中文（简体）中文（繁體）HrvatskiČeskyDanskeesti keelNederlandsSuomiFrançaisDeutschΕλληνικήहिन्दीMagyarGaeilgeIndonesiaíslenskaItaliano日本語ភាសាខ្មែរ한국어македонски јазикبهاس ملايوMaltiNorskPolskiPortuguêsPortuguês - PortugalRomânăРусскийEspañolKiswahiliSvenskaעבריתLietuviųlatviešuslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпскиதமிழ்ภาษาไทยTürkçeFilipinoукраї́нськаTiếng ViệtMay 30, 2024Issue 516|View Past IssuesPublished byGlobal Energy MonitorEditor's NoteWhat comes after coal mines and power plants shut down? Many major coal-producing and consuming countries are attempting to grapple with the economic and environmental consequences of the inevitable decline of coal. In the US, theEnvironmental Protection Agency(EPA) has rejected a plan by regulators in Alabama to allow unlined coal ash dams to remain when they are in contact with groundwater. The EPA’s decision on Alabama’s coal ash plan is likely to face a legal challenge just as Republicans are vowing to reverse the national coal ash regulation. In the midst of its energy crisis and political opposition, the South African government hasdecidedto delay further coal plant closures. The Presidential Climate Commission suggests Eskom would probably need the delay to ensure proper public consultation and economic diversification before more closures anyway.In Australia, the New South Wales government hasunveiledits proposal for a transition authority for coal mining communities. A common element in many just transition strategies is the rehabilitation and reuse of old mining sites. Key to proper rehabilitation is regulators requiring financial provision to cover the costs of restoring the site. InSouth AfricaandWales, there are current examples of where regulators and companies have failed to provide sufficient funding to match their rhetoric on promised post-mining rehabilitation.FeaturesMonthly drop hints that China’s greenhouse gas emissions may have peaked in 2023A three per cent decline in greenhouse gas emissions in March, the first fall since the lifting of COVID-19 restrictions in December 2022, reinforces the view that China’s emissions could have peaked in 2023,writesLauri Myllyvirta from the Centre for Research on Energy and Clean Air inCarbon Brief.Pressure grows on banks to end business with Indonesian coal giant AdaroCalls are mounting for global financiers to cut ties with Adaro, one of Indonesia’s biggest coal companies, as the miner shows no sign of moving away from the fossil fuel despite its net-zero pledge,writesHans Nicholas Jong inMongabay.Tribal forest dwellers resist Adani’s Bijahan coal projectAdani’s proposed Bijahan coal-mining project in the eastern Indian state of Odisha threatens to consume four villages and displace Indigenous communities, and their forest habitat,writesAyaskant Das inAdani Watch.‘They stole our jobs and life’: Anger and desperation in India’s coal beltHundreds of residents have fled the town of Harishpur in West Bengal after the collapse of 25 houses caused by Eastern Coalfield Limited’s Madhabpur open-cut coal mine,writesPriyanka Shankar inAl Jazeera.Japan’s steel industry: a laggard for decarbonisationJapan’s steel industry decarbonisation goals fail to align with the country’s climate targets, which are already considered inadequate compared to its peers,writesEric Koons inEnergy Tracker Asia.Top NewsUS EPA rejects Alabama plan to allow coal ash in unlined dams:The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has rejected Alabama’s 2021 application for a federally approved program to manage coal ash landfills and impoundments. The EPA found that Alabama’s proposed scheme was significantly weaker than federal standards, which do not allow coal ash impoundments to pollute groundwater after closure. The EPA also found that the Alabama Department of Environmental Management (ADEM) has approved dams with inadequate monitoring requirements, including an insufficient number of wells and wells in the wrong locations to detect groundwater contamination. ADEM said it plans a federal court appeal against the decision. Alabama Power, which owns most of the coal ash dams in the state, has been repeatedly fined for groundwater contamination. The Southern Environment Law Center welcomed the decision.(Inside Climate News,Environmental Protection Agency,Southern Environmental Law Center)Glencore’s Queensland CCS project rejected:The Queensland Department of Environment, Science and Innovation has rejected a proposal by a Glencore subsidiary to inject liquefied carbon dioxide (CO2) into the Great Artesian Basin. Carbon Transport and Storage Corporation (CTSCo), a Glencore subsidiary, proposed a demonstration project to capture carbon dioxide from one of the two 440 MW coal units at the Millmerran coal power station and pump 330,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide to an injection point in the Surat Basin. The department’s review of CTSCo’s environmental impact statement found that CO2 injected into the aquifer could migrate and would likely cause irreversible changes to groundwater quality and environmental values. The department determined groundwater effects could result in “increased concentrations of chloride, sulphate, salinity, various metals, and metalloids (including lead and arsenic)”. AgForce, the Queensland Farmers’ Federation and the Lock the Gate Alliance all opposed Glencore’s proposal. Lock the Gate welcomed the decision but warned that the federal Labor government’s recently released gas strategy effectively promotes carbon capture and storage across the Great Artesian Basin.(ABC News,Lock the Gate,Department of Environment, Science and Innovation)Shareholders back Australian company’s deal to sell Russian coal assets:Shareholders in Tigers Realm Coal have overwhelmingly approved the sale of the company’s Russian coal mines and port for $US49 million to APM Invest, a company owned by Russian mining investor Mark Buzuk. The sale flowed from a Federal Court of Australia ruling dismissing a legal challenge by Tigers Realm Coal against sanctions imposed by the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) after the Russian invasion of Ukraine. To date, the department has not imposed any penalty on the company for the breach of the sanctions, but the sale of the shares would financially benefit the Russian Direct Investment Fund (RDIF), Russia’s sovereign wealth fund, which holds an 8.41 per cent stake in Tigers Realm Coal. The US Treasury has stated that RDIF is “widely considered a slush fund” for Russian President Vladimir Putin. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade declined to comment. The company aims to complete the transaction by June 30.(Sydney Morning Herald)Regulator backtracks on original rehabilitation plan for Welsh mine:Representatives of Merthyr Tydfil council have confirmed that it only holds £15 million (US$19 million) in bond funds to rehabilitate the closed Ffos y Fran mine but estimates complete restoration will cost between £75 million (US$96 million) and £125 million (US$159 million). The company and regulators originally said the pit would be backfilled with mine waste and rehabilitated once mining ended. Merthyr (South Wales) closed the mine in November 2023 and declared it had “insufficient funds” to undertake the original restoration plan. No rehabilitation work has occurred since the closure of the mine, and the mine void is filling with water. A solicitor for the council, Geraint Morgan, told the Welsh parliament’s climate change committee that planning permission was granted in 2005 with a requirement for a £15m bond and a £15m guarantee. Morgan told the committee the latest accounts show the parent company holds about £104,000. “A parent company guarantee is only worth what a company is worth,” he said. Coal Action Network has previously called for the Welsh parliament to ensure the implementation of the original rehabilitation plan.(Wales Online)Russian mine officials handed prison terms over 2021 mine explosion:A Russian court sentenced Anatoly Lobanov to four years in prison for his role in the November 2021 methane explosion at the Listvyazhnaya underground coal mine. Lobanov, the former chief engineer, was found guilty of providing false information on the safety of the mine. The methane explosion killed 46 miners and five rescue workers and injured a further 92 people. Previously, a court sentenced a mine inspector to six years in prison with an additional three years for accepting a bribe from the company operating the mine. The court also sentenced the chief state inspector of the Belovsky district to a three-year prison sentence for accepting a bribe.(Radio Free Europe)Indian businessmen convicted overcoal block allocation:A special court in Delhi has found B S Ispat Ltd and two of the company directors guilty of cheating and criminal conspiracy under the Indian Penal Code in the allocation of the Marki-Mangli-I coal block in Maharashtra. The company and the directors are awaiting sentencing.(The Hindu)NewsCanada:Video footagerevealedcoal spilled over the side of a ship into Burrard Inlet during loading at Neptune Terminals in late 2023.Indonesia:Construction ofa coal highway in Jambi province, originally due to be finished by June 2023, is now slated forcompletionby December 2024. The road is to relieve traffic congestion on highways used by about 9300 coal trucks.New Zealand: TheMinister for Foreign Affairs did notseekadvice on the international implications for New Zealand, a member of the Powering Past Coal Alliance, to allow new thermal coal mines to operate beyond 2030.South Africa:Aldwych, a UK company with a majority stake in the 360 MW Kelvin power station in Gauteng, has beenboughtby Harith InfraCo, with shareholders including the Government Employees Pension Fund and the Development Bank of Southern Africa.South Africa:Tendele hassenta fleet of heavy machinery to begin preparations for three new coal mines before the conclusion of the environmental impact assessment and public consultation process.US:Lawyers for the Los Angeles County Employees Retirement Association want todeposeOhio Governor Mike Dewine but have not stated why. The association is suing FirstEnergy over the House Bill 6 corruption scandal.US:An administrative law judge hasruledthat Xcel Energy’s negligence contributed to a 2011 explosion that took the 939 MW Sherco 3 coal unit offline for 22 months and should refund customers for higher power costs. The refund will be less than US$34 million for the utility’s 1.3 million Minnesota customers.US:A 24-year-old bulldozer operator died when a coal pilecollapsedat Santee Cooper’s 1260 MW Winyah Generating Station in South Carolina. The plant is due to close in 2027.US:Twenty-seven Republican members of Congress haveproposeda resolution to block the Environmental Protection Agency’s coal ash rule.US:The latest financial disclosure by West Virginia Democrat Senator Joe Manchin revealed heearnedUS$389,987 from Enersystems, a coal supply company he founded in 1988.“Continuing to approve coal mines in Australia while we tell the world we take emissions reduction seriously is environmental vandalism and damaging to our credibility at home and abroad,”saidformer South Australian Premier Mike Rann.Companies + MarketsNSW government unveils coal transition authorities:The New South Wales government has unveiled its proposed model of Future Jobs and Investment Authorities to guide the transition of coal communities in the Hunter, Illawarra, Central West and North West regions. The government estimates that by 2040, all four of the state’s coal-fired power stations and 32 of the 39 coal mines will close. In 2022-23, 87 per cent of coal produced in NSW was exported, with the bulk of that through coal terminals in Newcastle. The government has proposed establishing an authority for each of the four coal regions. The membership of the overarching Future Jobs and Investment Board includes the chairs of each of the regional authorities, unions, industry associations and relevant government agencies.(New South Wales Government)South Africa Climate Commission to report on impact of delayed closures:South Africa’s Presidential Climate Commission (PCC), a key government climate advisory body, plans to release a report assessing the impact on national climate commitments from the delayed closure of the 1600 MW Camden plant, the 600 MW Grootvlei plant and the 1200 MW Hendrina coal plants. The plants were initially scheduled to close between 2023 and 2027 but will remain online until 2030. PCC executive director Dr Crispian Olver said the backlash against the October 2022 closure of the Komati coal plant highlighted the need for better community consultation and implementation of economic diversification strategies. “We want to start with consultations, then do the repurposing and diversification and only then pull the power plants off. That in itself is already going to push decommissioning deadlines up by four or five years,” Olver said.(Engineering News)South African coal company has underprovided for rehabilitation:The long-delayed financial report for the Salungano Group for the year to March 2023 revealed the company had breached National Environmental Management Act requirements for adequate provision for the rehabilitation costs of its mines. The company disclosed that its rehabilitation liability at the end of March 2023 was about 2.38 billion rand (US$130 million), up from 1.39 billion rand (US$76 million) the year before. About three-quarters of the rehabilitation liability is due to the closures of the Vanggatfontei and Elandspruit mines. The Vanggatfontei mine was placed on a care and maintenance basis in March 2022 after its 10-year coal supply agreement with Eskom expired. Eskom did not renew the supply agreement for the Elandspruit mine. The company’s Khanyisa mine has also closed, pending a possible extension.(News24,Salungano Group [Pdf])Indonesia set to revoke a local content rule for solar, but others remain:Indonesia’s Ministry of Industry plans to rescind a 2018 regulation requiring all renewable power projects to meet a 25 per cent local content benchmark for goods and services unless granted an exemption where domestic supply is not possible. The decision to rescind the regulation is the result of international banks baulking at the local content requirement. PLN reported in January that nine renewable projects worth US$3.1 billion had stalled for lack of global funding. The Indonesian Solar Energy Association (AESI ) said local content rules should follow measures to promote the development of the local market and noted domestic solar module production is not considered viable. AESI chairman Fabby Tumiwa said that even if the government revokes the 2018 regulation, it may make little difference if two other rules from 2017 that regulate local content for solar modules and solar power plants remain in place.(Jakarta Post [paywall])Imported coal costs hit Pakistani power consumers:Pakistan’s thermal coal imports halved to about 9 million tonnes between the year to the end of June 2020 and the year to June 2023. High global prices for thermal coal pushed operators of imported coal power plants to cut generation. Despite this, the cost of generation from imported coal rose by about 15.4 per cent to 22.84 rupees per kilowatt hour (KWh) (US$0.27 per KWh) in April compared to the same month in 2023. In response to the high cost of generation, promoters of increased lignite mining of the Thar coalfields have pushed the government to convert plants to run on domestic coal. Pakistan imports coal from South Africa, Afghanistan, and Indonesia.(The News International)US pension fund urges vote against Exxon directors over lawsuit:The California Public Employees’ Retirement System (CalPERS), a pension fund manager with a US$1 billion holding in Exxon, has urged investors to vote against all directors at the company’s May 29 annual general meeting. CalPERS warned that “decades of shareholder rights are under threat” from an Exxon lawsuit against two activist investors, Arjuna Capital and Follow This, over a proposed shareholder resolution they submitted in January calling on the company to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions. Exxon responded by launching legal action in the federal court against the two funds and has pressed on with the case even after the two withdrew the proposed resolution. Exxon is seeking costs against two and “other and further relief as the Court may deem just and proper”. The chief investment officer of Arjuna Capital, Natasha Lamb, said Exxon’s lawsuit “amounts to tactics of intimidation and bullying” to silence investors. In a letter to Calpers members, the fund’s CEO and president warn that if Exxon’s case succeeds, it will upend the rules of shareholder democracy.(CNBC,Calpers)Share on FacebookShare on TwitterForward to a FriendSubscribe