Campaign URLCopyTwitter0tweetsSubscribePast IssuesRSSTranslateEnglishالعربيةAfrikaansбеларуская мовабългарскиcatalà中文（简体）中文（繁體）HrvatskiČeskyDanskeesti keelNederlandsSuomiFrançaisDeutschΕλληνικήहिन्दीMagyarGaeilgeIndonesiaíslenskaItaliano日本語ភាសាខ្មែរ한국어македонски јазикبهاس ملايوMaltiNorskPolskiPortuguêsPortuguês - PortugalRomânăРусскийEspañolKiswahiliSvenskaעבריתLietuviųlatviešuslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпскиதமிழ்ภาษาไทยTürkçeFilipinoукраї́нськаTiếng ViệtJune 6, 2024Issue 517|View Past IssuesPublished byGlobal Energy MonitorEditor's NoteThe election results in South Africa and India – two major coal producers and consumers – highlight the formidable challenges ahead in the transition away from coal power and mining. InSouth Africa, the ruling African National Congress (ANC) lost 71 seats and now requires one or more coalition partners to form a minority government. Which other party or partiesPresident Cyril Ramaphosaseeks to negotiate an agreement with will have profound implications for the transition to renewables. InIndia, the impact of the narrow win for the coalition led byPrime Minister Narendra Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) is less clear. Modi will still head the new government, but the BJP no longer has a majority in its own right.The European Union (EU) is further advanced than either India or South Africa with the transition of its power sector away from coal. Even so, the outcome of the European Parliament elections between June 6 and 9 will affect the level of climate policy ambition over the next five years.FeaturesEuropean power-sector emissions fell by one-fifth since the last European Union electionAs voters in the European Union head to the polls, analysts note that power-sector emissions have fallen by 20 per cent across the region since the 2019 election, with coal generation continuing to slide,writeMolly Lempriere and Verner Viisainen inCarbon Brief.India’s mega ‘coal scam’: the scandal that refuses to dieFor over a decade, India’s Directorate of Revenue Intelligence and journalists have been investigating the over-invoicing of coal imports by a handful of private and state-owned companies,writeAbir Dasgupta, Ravi Nair and Paranjoy Guha Thakurta inFrontline.A lethal logicThe environmental cost of the proposed shift from imported to local Thar lignite for power generation in Pakistan may be very high,writesAzhar Lashari inThe News International.Top NewsElection rebuff for Modi:Results announced by the Election Commission of India (ECI) indicate the National Democratic Alliance, led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party, will win a majority in the 543-member Lok Sabha, the lower house of India’s parliament. With 272 seats required for a majority, the NDA won 293 seats. In a significant rebuff for Modi, the BJP lost 63 seats and, with just 240 seats, no longer commands a majority in its own right. Ahead of the election, Modi boasted that the BJP would win 370 seats in its own right and the NDA would win over 400 seats. Analysts suggest BJP’s reliance on two minor parties in its alliance will shift the dynamics of the government. The opposition INDIA alliance, a coalition of more than two dozen parties led by the Indian National Congress (INC), has won 232 seats. The Modi government, which has been in power since May 2014, set an ambitious 2030 renewables target but, in more recent times, has also championed a dramatic expansion in new coal generation and coal mining, especially by powerful private companies such as the Adani Group. The Modi government has also significantly weakened environmental assessment processes for coal projects, overseen a crackdown on civil society groups challenging projects and stoked anti-Muslim sentiment.(Al Jazeera)South African election delivers minority government:The ruling African National Congress (ANC) has lost its parliamentary majority, winning just 159 seats in the 400-member National Assembly at the May 29 election and faces the challenge of negotiating a minority government. The Democratic Alliance (DA), the largest opposition party, won 87 seats and, while a strong critic of the ANC, is open to discussing a minority government with President Cyril Ramaphosa. Another possible partner in a minority government is former President Jacob Zuma’s uMkhonto weSizwe party (MK party), which won 58 seats. Zuma’s precondition for supporting an ANC government is the resignation of Ramaphosa, a demand supported by Julius Malema, the leader of the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) that won 39 seats. Both the MK Party and the EFF are  hostile to a transition to renewables. In Mpumalanga province, which hosts many coal mines and power stations, the newly formed MK party snared an 18 per cent share of votes, mainly at the expense of the ANC. A draft internal ANC discussion document proposed a minority government arrangement with the DA and the socially conservative Inkatha Freedom Party and urged against a deal with the MK or EFF parties. Another discussion paper proposes an agreement with the EFF and the right-wing Patriotic Alliance. The new parliament must sit by June 16 to elect the President.(Al Jazeera,Reuters,Financial Times)Canadian district launches appeal against Alberta support for new mine:The Municipal District of Ranchland has filed a legal challenge against the decision of the Alberta Energy Regulator (AER) to exempt Northback Holdings from restrictions on coal mining affecting the company’s proposed Grassy Mountain mine. Northback Holdings, a subsidiary of Australian mining billionaire Gina Rinehart’s Hancock Prospecting, is seeking approval for an open-cut metallurgical coal mine. The AER decided the Alberta government’s policy blocking new projects on the eastern slopes of the Rockies does not apply to Northback’s project. Ranchlands argues that the AER improperly decided to allow public hearings on Northback’s proposal after receiving a letter from Alberta’s Minister for Energy and Mines, Brian Jean. In August 2021, the Canadian Minister for Environment rejected the project because of likely damage to First Nations heritage and water pollution impacts on fish, especially from selenium emissions, but a court overturned this decision on appeal.(Western Standard,Canadian Press)European court rejects Polish appeal against fine over Turow mine:The Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) has ruled that Poland must pay €68.5 million (US$75 million) in fines levied by the European Commission over its refusal to comply with a court ruling ordering the suspension of mining at the Turow lignite mine. After the Czech Republic initiated legal action against Poland in 2021, the CJEU ordered Poland to suspend mining operations while the case was before the court. Poland refused. In response, the European Commission imposed a fine of €500,000 (US$545,000) per day, with the amount deducted from transfers owing to Poland. After settling the case with the Czech Republic in February 2022, Poland wanted the fine cancelled. The court dismissed Poland’s claims, stating the settlement of the claim did not negate the validity of the fine. “Otherwise, the objective of the periodic penalty payment, namely to guarantee the effective application of EU law, such application being an essential component of the rule of law, would not be attained,” the court stated. Poland will appeal the latest decision.(Euractiv,Notes from Poland,Court of Justice of the European Union [Pdf])Study finds no need for new fossil fuel leases:A study by the University College London and the International Institute for Sustainable Development published inScienceargues that the world needs no new fossil fuel projects as existing projects contain enough energy stocks to meet the Paris Agreement goal of limiting global heating to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. The paper argues that, as preventing new projects is generally easier than closing existing ones, the emphasis for achieving ambitious climate action should focus on stopping fossil fuel exploration, the development of new fossil fuel projects and blocking the permitting of new, large-scale fossil fuel–consuming infrastructure.(Guardian,University College London)New South Wales considers its ‘largest ever’ coal mine proposal:The New South Wales (NSW) Environment Protection Authority has described the proposal by Yancoal and Glencore to extend the life of its joint-venture Hunter Valley Operations (HVO) mines as the “largest coal-mining proposal ever put forward” in the state. The companies propose extracting 716 million tonnes of coal over 26 years until 2050. When burnt, the coal would emit 1.2 billion tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions. The operation of the mine alone would directly generate 30 million tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions and increase pressure on other sectors of the NSW economy to make deeper cuts to meet the state’s legislated emissions reduction target. The HVO project is just one of 18 new coal projects NSW government agencies are considering for approval.(Guardian,Lock the Gate)NewsChina:Three minersdiedafter a section of the Huafeng coal mine flooded, trapping ten workers in the mine.India:A former managing director of Coal India and a former high-level public servant havequestionedthe push for Adani’sBijahan coal project inOdisha.India:Only four of the 426 peopleregisteredto vote at the Bagdubhi village in Jharkhand cast votes in the general election. The election boycott was a protest against the construction of a coal dump.India:Bharat Coal Gasification & Chemicals, a joint venture between Coal India and BHEL, hasreleaseda tender document for contractors to build a proposed coal-to-ammonium nitrate plant in Odisha.India:Two directors of BS Ispat Limited, Mohan and Rakesh Agrawal, weresentencedto three and two years in jail, respectively, for their role in the allocation of the Marki-Mangli-I coal block. The court fined the company five million rupees (US$60,000).Pakistan:Eleven workersdiedfrom suffocation at a mine in the Sanjadi coalfield near Quetta.UK:Anglo Americansaysthe sale of its five coal mines will be among its first divestment priorities. Anglo American is under pressure from investors to sell less profitable businesses after rejecting a takeover bid from BHP.US:Joe Manchin, a US senator for West Virginia, hasresignedfrom the Democratic Party and registered as an independent, sparking suggestions he may run for another term in the Senate or return to state politics. Manchin, who has a financial stake in a family coal business, has long resisted strong climate policies.Companies + MarketsThe Philippines rebuffs pressure to drop moratorium on new coal plants:The Department of Energy Undersecretary Rowena Guevara has rejected calls to lift the October 2020 moratorium on new coal plants, stating the agency supports the need to reduce reliance on coal. According to the Global Coal Plant Tracker, the Philippines currently has 12,082 MW of operating coal plant capacity and a further 735 MW under construction. Philippines coal plants are overwhelmingly reliant on imported coal. The former Energy Secretary Jericho Petilla and the President of the Senate Chiz Escudero, recently supported lifting the moratorium to cater for increased demand and counter persistent outages in the Luzon and Visayas grids. The Center for Energy, Ecology, and Development (CEED) has rejected claims that coal plants are cheaper or more reliable than renewables. CEED recently released an analysis of power plant outages in the Philippines between 2019 and 2023 that found that coal and gas-fired plants are the primary source of blackouts.(Manila Standard,Business Mirror)Indian election result prompts Adani sharemarket rout:The share price of Adani Group companies surged in the wake of exit polls championed by major Indian media outlets that tipped electoral gains for the National Democratic Alliance led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Gautam Adani has long enjoyed a close relationship with Modi and benefitted from a suite of favourable government policies. The announcement of the final election results on Tuesday triggered a collapse of up to 25 per cent in the valuation of the ten stock exchange-listed Adani Group companies. The company is the largest private developer of new coal mining and power plant capacity and remains under investigation for over-invoicing Indian power utilities for imported thermal coal.(Livemint,Financial Express)Qualified EU support for German compensation deal:The European Commission has notified Germany of its qualified support for €1.75 billion (US$1.9 billion) in compensation to LEAG for the closure of its lignite mines and power plants by 2038. The European Commission approved Germany providing €1.2 billion (US$1.3 billion) to cover the cost of mine rehabilitation works and the pension costs for workers affected by the closure. The payment of the remaining €550 million (US$598 million) would only occur if, according to an undisclosed formula, coal generation would be profitable. The German government agreed in 2020 to compensate LEAG and RWE’s coal exit by 2038. Last year, the EU approved the €2.6 billion (US$2.8 billion) compensation agreement with RWE but questioned the proposed payment to LEAG. LEAG is a subsidiary of Czech billionaire Daniel Kretinsky’s EPH group, which has invested in end-of-life coal plants around the world.(Euractiv,Mining.com)Russian Railways opposes tax changes as profitability of exports slump:Russian Railways and the Federal Antimonopoly Service have warned that a Ministry of Energy proposal to change freight rates could cut coal exports by 30 to 40 million tonnes rather than achieving the aim of boosting exports through northwestern and southern ports. Russian Railways wants any changes aimed at reducing freight costs for shipments to northwestern and southern ports offset by payments to support shipments east to the Asian market. Russian coal exports between January and April are estimated to have fallen by 12 per cent to 62.3 million tonnes. European Union sanctions, rising costs and falling prices have hit the profitability of Russian coal companies.(Sxcoal)Draft South Korean energy plan goes slow on coal closures:The newly released draft of South Korea’s 11thpower plan leaves existing coal plants operating until late next decade and does not increase the 2030 renewables target. The draft plan proposes replacing 12 coal plants that turn 30 years old in 2037 and 2038 with hydrogen-fired capacity or pumped hydro storage. The draft plan proposes converting other coal plants to run on liquefied natural gas. The plan suggests electricity demand could increase from 134,500 MW in 2022 to 157,800 MW by 2038, mainly as a result of increased requirements of data centres and computer chip manufacturing. The plan endorses the construction of three new nuclear plants and one small modular reactor by late next decade.(Recharge News)South African coal company avoids emission reduction commitment:Thungela Resources, South Africa’s largest export coal producer, has rejected a request from Just Share, a shareholder advocacy group, to set a target for emissions caused by customers’ use of its product. Emma Schuster from Just Share told the company’s annual general meeting that the failure to set a ‘Scope 3’ emissions reduction target meant the company didn’t “have a credible climate strategy”. Just Share estimates that Scope 3 emissions account for 98 per cent of the company’s greenhouse gas pollution. Thungela CEO July Ndlovu said it would like to avoid setting targets “for the sake of committing [to] targets that we will not be able to meet”. Anglo American spun off its South African coal projects into Thungela Resources in June 2021. In September 2023, the company bought the Enhsam coal mine in Queensland and now owns seven mines and a 23 per cent stake in the Richards Bay Coal Terminal. The company produced 13.1 million tonnes in 2023.(News24)Green Steel TransitionReport says Nippon Steel avoiding domestic emissions reductions:A report by SteelWatch, an NGO group pressing the steel industry to slash greenhouse gas emissions, argues that Nippon Steel has failed to set an emissions reduction target consistent with the 1.5C Paris Agreement target. Nippon Steel owns 11 of the 19 blast furnaces operating in Japan and accounts for the bulk of the country’s iron and steel production. Nippon Steel, the world’s fourth largest steel producer, has only set a 2030 target based on total emissions from a 2013 baseline that corresponds with a surge in fossil fuel emissions after the Fukushima disaster. SteelWatch argues the company continues to pursue the co-firing of coal-based blast furnaces with hydrogen combined with carbon capture and storage, an expensive and unproven technology in the steel sector. The report also highlights that the company’s emissions reduction target does not include pollution from its stakes in steel plants in Thailand and India.(SteelWatch)Resources“EU election 2024: What the manifestos say on energy and climate change”, Carbon Brief, May 24, 2024, and“Climate in the 2024 EU elections and the making of the union’s next leadership”,Clean Energy Wire, April 4, 2024.These articles provide a handy guide to the European elections and the likely implications for EU climate policy over the next five years.Share on FacebookShare on TwitterForward to a FriendSubscribe