Campaign URLCopyTwitter0tweetsSubscribePast IssuesRSSTranslateEnglishالعربيةAfrikaansбеларуская мовабългарскиcatalà中文（简体）中文（繁體）HrvatskiČeskyDanskeesti keelNederlandsSuomiFrançaisDeutschΕλληνικήहिन्दीMagyarGaeilgeIndonesiaíslenskaItaliano日本語ភាសាខ្មែរ한국어македонски јазикبهاس ملايوMaltiNorskPolskiPortuguêsPortuguês - PortugalRomânăРусскийEspañolKiswahiliSvenskaעבריתLietuviųlatviešuslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпскиதமிழ்ภาษาไทยTürkçeFilipinoукраї́нськаTiếng ViệtJune 13, 2024Issue 518|View Past IssuesPublished byGlobal Energy MonitorEditor's NoteThe European Unionelectiondelivered mixed results, with the centre-right European People’s Party gaining seats but still requiring support from other parties for President Ursula von der Leyen to win another five-year term. There were also solid gains for far-right parties in France, Germany and Italy, and setbacks for the Greens. Von der Leyen had previously signalled her intent to revisit the existing climate laws but may need the support of the Greens for her re-election. Even if the new EU parliament doesn’t revisit the existing climate laws, it will be harder to win support for an ambitious 2040 emissions reduction target.InIndia, it is unclear whether Prime Minister Narendra Modi will respond to his narrow win by tempering his hardline approach to environmental issues, civil society groups and opposition parties. Modi has appointed the former Minister for Coal, Pralhad Joshi, who oversaw a massive expansion of domestic coal production, to head the ministry responsible for achieving the 500,000 MW target of non-fossil fuel generation capacity by 2030. For its part, the state-ownedNTPC, India’s largest power utility, is considering issuing tenders for up to 15,200 megawatts (MW) of new coal capacity.In South Africa, the African National Congress is yet to announce its partners in a coalition government. The composition of the coalition will have a profound effect on the country’s power development plans.FeaturesThe US Environmental Protection Agency's coal ash crackdown comes with a big caveatAn updated regulation targetting pollution from coal ash dumps relies on the owners to propose steps to protect groundwater with state agencies primarily responsible for oversight,writesinE & E News.Mine water is spewing into this West Virginia community while companies squabble over who is responsibleSince the Pinnacle Mining Complex discharged dirty mine water into area creeks, locals report polluted drinking water and widespread illness,writesEllie Heffernan inIn These Times.Top NewsColombia announces plan to ban coal exports to Israel:The Colombian President, Gustavo Petro, announced a proposed ban on coal exports to Israel over the ongoing military attacks on Gaza. “We are going to suspend coal exports to Israel until the genocide stops,” Petro posted on X, formerly known as Twitter. The ban will come into effect five days after the decree is published in the government gazette but will not apply to cargoes already approved for export. Colombia accounts for about 60 per cent of Israel’s coal imports in 2024. Petro stated that exports would only resume after Israel complies with the International Court of Justice’s request to halt the military assault on the city of Rafah in the Gaza Strip. The Colombian Mining Association criticised the decision as threatening foreign investment. Global Energy Embargo for Palestine, an advocacy group pressing governments to end coal and oil exports to Israel, welcomed the decision. The proposal is open for public comment until June 17.(Financial Times,S & P Global)Drift to right in European Union election:The European elections resulted in increased representation for right-wing parties, dimming the chances the new parliament will pass any new environmental laws in the next five years. Centre-right parties hold a majority in the European Parliament but far right-wing parties made gains, especially in France, Italy and Germany. The Greens fell from 71 to 53 seats, with the biggest losses in Germany and minor gains in some countries. The centre-right European People’s Party, headed by President Ursula Von der Leyen, holds the largest number of seats but does not have a majority in its own right. Analysts expect that existing climate laws will remain intact, but achieving agreement on the European Union’s (EU) 2040 emissions reduction target is likely to be much more difficult. The European Commission had suggested a 90 per cent emissions reduction target for the 2040 goal, but this would require the approval of each EU country and the European parliament.(Euronews,Reuters,Politico,Climate Action Network)Indian election outcome may build pressure to diversify energy system:The results of the Indian election may increase pressure for a wider distribution of renewables projects beyond the four or five states, including BJP strongholds of Gujarat and Rajasthan, according to Rohit Chandra from the e IIT Delhi School of Public Policy. “The last decade saw most of this activity in four or five states, including.” Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s BJP party no longer commands a majority in its own right and must form a coalition government. The better-than-expected performance of opposition parties has dented Modi’s aura of invincibility and may increase pressure for greater decentralisation of government spending. Modi has appointed Pralhad Joshi, the former Minister for Coal and Mines, as the Minister for New and Renewable Energy where he will be responsible for achieving the 500,000 MW target of non-fossil fuel generation capacity by 2030.(Business Standard)UN Secretary-General calls for ban on fossil fuel advertising:In his World Environment Day speech, the United Nations Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, called for governments to ban advertising from fossil fuel companies in the same way that many governments restrict or prohibit advertising for products “that harm human health – like tobacco”. Guterres also urged news media and tech companies “to stop taking fossil fuel advertising”. TheGuardiancontacted 11 major tech and media groups that accept fossil fuel advertising.Politicowas the only publisher to respond, insisting there was a strict firewall between advertising and editorial content and that all advertising and sponsored content is clearly identified.The Washington Post, theNew York Times,Reuters,Axios,Bloomberg, National Public Radio, CNN and MSNBC did not respond to a request for comment. Guterres also called on every city, region, industry, financial institution, and company to present “robust” transition plans “that steer clear of the dubious carbon offsets that erode public trust while doing little or nothing to help the climate”.(Guardian,Guardian,UN Secretary-General)South African company resumes mining before assessment completed:The Mfolozi Community Environmental Justice Organisation (MCEJO) has condemned the actions of police in blocking a World Environment Day protest march that planned to deliver a memorandum to representatives of Petmin’s Tendele Coal Mining. MCEJO said parts of a pro-mine crowd standing with the police threatened to attack the marchers. It is not the first time opponents of the mine have been the target of harassment. In October 2020, three men assassinated local activist leader Fikile Ntshangase in her home. No one has been charged with her murder. The Somkhele mine was put on a care and maintenance basis in June 2022 after a court ruled the company was in breach of legal requirements. MCEJO wants the company to suspend mining at its Somkhele mine in eMalahleni until the finalisation of the court-ordered revised environmental assessment. MCEJO said that the company began relocating people from three communities in early May to allow mining while it was simultaneously consulting residents as part of the environmental assessment process.(News24,Mfolozi Community Environmental Justice Organisation)Ohio subsidies for coal plants set to pass US$500 million:The Public Utilities Commission of Ohio (PUCO) estimates that Ohio electricity consumers will pay about US$191 million in subsidies in 2024 for two coal plants guaranteed payments under the provisions of House Bill 6. The legislation, which was adopted in 2019 and came into effect in 2020, was later found by a federal jury to have been the product of bribes. Since the bill was adopted, three lobbyists and the former House Speaker were convicted, and FirstEnergy admitted paying a US$4.2 million bribe to Sam Randazzo, the former PUCO chairman. Despite the Ohio legislature repealing US$1 billion in planned payments for two nuclear plants, the subsidies for the Kyger Creek Coal Plant in Ohio and the Clifty Creek Power Plant in Indiana remain intact. Between 2020 and the end of 2023, the utilities owning the two coal plants received US$307 million to cover losses on the two old plants.(MSN)“We must directly confront those in the fossil fuel industry who have shown relentless zeal for obstructing progress – over decades.  Billions of dollars have been thrown at distorting the truth, deceiving the public, and sowing doubt. I thank the academics and the activists, the journalists and the whistleblowers, who have exposed those tactics – often at great personal and professional risk,”saidAntonio Guterres, the United Nations Secretary-General.NewsBangladesh:In a letter to the Prime Minister’s Office, a companyallegesthat the Coal Power Generation Company awarded a coal supply contract for the Matabari power plant to a company disqualified during the tender process.India:The opposition leader in the Chhattisgarh Assembly hascalledon the state government to block deforestation of the Hasdeo Arand forests by coal mining.India:The Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporationwantsapproval to switch from 100 per cent imported coal at its 800 MW North Chennai Stage III plant to use half domestic coal.Slovenia:Slovenia’s latest draft of its 2030 energy and climate planproposesan emissions reduction target of 55 per cent by 2033, at odds with the European Union’s 2030 deadline. The later date coincides with the 2033 closure date for the 945 MW TES Sostanj lignite units supplied by the Premogovnik Velenje mine.UK:Chris Wills, the Liberal Democrats candidate for Whitehaven and Workington,saidthe party will not permit any new coal mines. The Conservative Party government approved the Whitehaven coal mine in 2022 but the decision is subject to legal challenges.US:Residentsrallyfor the Maryland Department of the Environment to reject CSX’s application for the continued operation of the Curtis Bay coal export terminal.US:The 200 MW Escalante Solar plant hasreplacedthe former 253 MW coal-fired Escalante Station in New Mexico.Companies + MarketsIndia’s largest power utility pursues a new round of coal plants:NTPC, India’s largest power generator, said it is “actively considering” issuing new tenders for up to 15,200 MW of new coal capacity. The tenders would be in addition to the 9600 MW of coal capacity already under construction. NTPC said tenders for 10400 MW will be issued in the current financial year to the end of March 2025, with 3200 MW and 1600 MW in each of the following financial years. The Central Electricity Authority’s latest national energy plan proposed expanding coal capacity by up to 80,000 MW by 2032. NTPC is also planning to increase coal production from its mines to about 50 million tonnes a year, up 16 million tonnes on 2023 production levels. In the previous financial year, NTPC consumed 241 million tonnes of coal, of which it imported 9.6 million tonnes.(Argus)Polish coal generation fells by almost ten per cent in 2023:Polish coal generation fell to a 60.5 per cent share in 2023, a decline of 9.9 per cent in a year, according to a report by Forum Energii on the transition of Poland’s power sector. Coal consumption fell by eight million tonnes in 2023 and has declined by 32.7 per cent since 2004. The report argues that significant shifts are occurring in Poland’s electricity industry due to changing technologies and market signals but not because of a coherent government plan. The report finds that the lack of energy planning, such as in storage capacity, is driving increasing rates of curtailment of renewable generation. Seventy-four gigawatt hours (GWh) of electricity was curtailed by the market regulator in 2023. This has ballooned to 400 GWh in the first five months of 2024.(Forum Energii)Climate Investment Funds approves US$500 million for Philippines:The Climate Investment Funds (CIF), a multilateral climate fund, has allocated US$500 million towards the implementation of a Philippines government plan to transition from coal to renewable power generation. The funding is for the accelerated retirement or repurposing of up to 900 MW of coal capacity by 2027, including the 232 MW Mindanao STEAG plant first commissioned in 2006. The CIF funding, comprising US$475 million in loans and US$25 million in grants, is part of the US$2.2 billion Accelerating Coal Transition investment program supported by the Asian Development Bank, the World Bank Group and private lenders. Part of the program is to add 1500 MW of renewable capacity by 2030.(Power Philippines,Climate Investment Funds)Indonesia set to grant coal concession to religious group:Indonesia’s Minister for Investment, Bahlil Lahadalia,announced that a coal concession will be awarded to Nahdlatul Ulama (NU), the country’s largest Islamic group, to provide the religious organisation with a source of income. The minister said that the coal concession “holds fairly large coal reserves” and was formerly a part of the 29,000 hectares cut from Kaltim Prima Coal’s (KPC) concession in East Kalimantan in 2022. The announcement followed President Joko Widodo’s signing a government regulation to issue special mining licenses to business entities owned by religious organizations “in order to improve people’s welfare”. Jatam (Friends of the Earth Indonesia) criticised Jokowi’s regulation as pork-barrelling politics to reward the ruling government’s political supporters. “The argument that mining business can help improve the welfare of religious organizations is nonsensical,” Jatam stated. 350.org said the decision would push NU to direct involvement in an industry driving climate change and with widespread environmental and social impacts.(Mining Weekly,Jakarta Post [paywall],VOI)Russian deal to boost coal exports via Iran suspended:A spokesperson for the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced the suspension of a trade deal aimed at boosting coal exports via Iran. “The process ... has stopped due to problems that our Iranian partners have,” said Zamir Kabulov from the ministry. The week before, Russia announced an agreement with Iran to complete the Rasht-Astara railway project, which would facilitate increased coal exports to India. The International North-South Corridor from Russia to Azerbaijan and then through Iran has been gradually proceeding in stages over the last twenty years. On completion, the railway would facilitate coal exports through the port at Bandar Abbas in Iran. Completion of the rail link would cut the transit time for Russian cargoes to India from 45 days to 15 days. Iran would earn billions of dollars in transit fees from the export link.(Reuters,Financial Express)Eskom shifts strategy on renewables and coal retirements:The CEO of Eskom, Dan Marokane, told the South African National Energy Association that the utility has decided to “decouple” the closure of old coal units from the commissioning of new renewable capacity. He said this was to avoid a repeat of community disquiet after the closure of Eskom’s Komati coal plant. Marokane also said Eskom has decided that instead of leasing out land at existing power plants for private sector renewables projects, the utility will enter into partnerships with private generators to develop the projects. The current Integrated Resource Plan assumes private power generators will secure allocations of renewable capacity via tender. The new Eskom plan may require the utility to apply for an exemption from the plan.(Engineering News)Resources“I decided that I would dedicate my life to helping the tribals of Hasdeo fight to protect their land”: Goldman Prize winner, Alok Shukla, YouTube/Adani Watch, June 11, 2024.This 16-minute video features Alok Shukla, the winner of the Goldman Prize, discussing the decade-long campaign by the indigenous people of India’s Hasdeo forests to protect their ancestral lands from coal mines.ArcelorMittal and the Responsibility of Stakeholders in the Steel Value Chain, Centre for Environmental Rights, May 2024. (Pdf) (The media release ishere.)This 9-page report reviews the risks and opportunities faced by ArcelorMittal South Africa in the facing of growing pressure to decarbonise the steel industry.Share on FacebookShare on TwitterForward to a FriendSubscribe