Campaign URLCopyTwitter0tweetsSubscribePast IssuesRSSTranslateEnglishالعربيةAfrikaansбеларуская мовабългарскиcatalà中文（简体）中文（繁體）HrvatskiČeskyDanskeesti keelNederlandsSuomiFrançaisDeutschΕλληνικήहिन्दीMagyarGaeilgeIndonesiaíslenskaItaliano日本語ភាសាខ្មែរ한국어македонски јазикبهاس ملايوMaltiNorskPolskiPortuguêsPortuguês - PortugalRomânăРусскийEspañolKiswahiliSvenskaעבריתLietuviųlatviešuslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпскиதமிழ்ภาษาไทยTürkçeFilipinoукраї́нськаTiếng ViệtJune 20, 2024Issue 519|View Past IssuesPublished byGlobal Energy MonitorEditor's NoteA newreportsuggests that up to 800 coal plants could be profitably closed early, underpinned by the rapid decline in the cost of renewables and storage. The report paints an optimistic picture of a pathway for the early retirement of many coal plants. InCanada, the last coal plant in Alberta has closed six years ahead of the 2030 deadline set back in 2015. In theUS, an administrative law judge delivered a scathing rebuke to Basin Electric Cooperative, the country’s largest rural electric co-op, over its failure to adequately consider renewables as a potentially cheaper source of power than its coal plants. The USEnergy Information Administrationnotes that the capacity factor of the coal fleet in the PJM Interconnection, the largest US wholesale power market, has plummeted by over 20 per cent since 2013.With just weeks to go before theUK election, the Labour Party has ruled out approving new coal mines but has sidestepped making any new commitments on operating or recently approved projects. InSouth Africa, President Cyril Ramaphosa was re-elected after negotiating a ‘government of national unity’ agreement with the Democratic Alliance and other minor parties. The agreement was silent on energy issues.Features‘Do you vacuum your lampshades?’ It was an idyllic town. Now it’s cursed by coal dustOpen-cut coal mines surround the New South Wales town of Muswellbrook, but the local community is dwindling, and coal dust coats everything,writesRyan Butta in theSydney Morning Herald.China’s 2035 targets can be a climate breakthroughChina can put the Paris Agreement on track when it releases its new and updated climate targets next year,writesLauri Myllyvirta inDialogue Earth.CampaignsCanadian province bids farewell to coal powerCapital Power has confirmed the conversion for the 466 MW Genesee 2 coal unit to run on gas. Genesee 2, a unit commissioned in 2005, was the last coal power unit in Alberta. In 2015, the then centre-left New Democratic Party premier, Rachel Notley, announced plans to phase out all coal generation by 2030, a proposal opposed by electricity utilities. Capital Power converted two other coal units at the Genesee plant to burn gas in 2023 and early 2024. The Pembina Institute, an energy policy think tank, noted the end of coal generation in the province came six years earlier than initially envisaged. In March 2001, coal accounted for 80 per cent of electricity generation in the province.(CBC,Capital Power,Pembina Institute)Top NewsReport estimates 800 coal plants eligible to switch to clean power:A report by the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis (IEEFA) estimates up to 800 coal plants could be phased out by the end of the decade and profitably replaced by solar generation and storage capacity. IEEFA estimates that about 600 plants that have operated for 30 years or more are mostly debt-free and not covered by power purchase agreements are prime candidates for retirement. The report finds there is a role for philanthropic support to partially subsidise the first deal to demonstrate to financial markets that such a transition is feasible. IEEFA estimates the most attractive projects are likely to be plants that are at least ten years old, have a capacity of 800 MW or more and are owned by a utility willing to renegotiate power purchase agreements and other contracts. However, the report cautions that significant hurdles to early retirement remain in countries with relatively young plants, such as Vietnam, or where generous power purchase agreements make it unattractive to buy out the contract.(Reuters,Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis)UK parties outline policies on coal mines:A Coal Action Network (CAN) review of the policy platforms of the major parties contesting the July 4 general election has found the Labour Party, the Liberal Democrats and the Green Party all opposeapproving any new coal mines. Plaid Cymru, a Welsh political party, opposes new open-cut coal mines. The Greens also pledged to cancel recent fossil fuel licences, which includes the West Cumbria mine the Conservative government approved. The company is licenced to operate the mine until 2049, pending current court challenges. Labour did not respond to a request for clarification on the mine. CAN wants the next government to legislate a ban on new coal licences and to address the operating mines, such as the Aberpergwm underground mine in South Wales that is licenced to operate until 2039.(Coal Action Network,DeSmog)South African government of national unity formed:Cyril Rampahosa has been elected for another term as South Africa’s President after the centre-right Democratic Alliance, the Inkatha Freedom Party, and other minor parties agreed to support a government of national unity led by the African National Congress. Ramaphosa was sworn in on June 19 but has yet to announce the new Cabinet. While the impact of the minority government on energy policy is not yet clear, the new MK Party of former President Jacob Zuma and the Economic Freedom Fighters led by Julius Malema refused to join a government headed by Rampahosa. Their parties oppose further coal closures and a rapid transition to renewables. The agreement of the coalition partners does not address specific policy areas such as energy, environment, health or plans for a just transition.(Al Jazeera,Mail & Guardian,African National Congress,News24)Records reveal Ohio Governor’s call to FirstEnergy about donation:Newly released documents reveal that Mike DeWine, the then Attorney-General and Republican candidate for Governor of Ohio, solicited the CEO of FirstEnergy Chuck Jones for a campaign contribution a month before the November 2018 election. The records reveal Jones sent the request to Mike Dowling, a senior FirstEnergy executive, who later texted Jones, stating, “Go ahead and call Mike DeWine on the $500k”. Jones confirmed the utility would direct the donation to the Republican Governors Association’s State Solutions fund, an entity that did not have to disclose the sources of its funding. Jones and Dowling, who no longer work for FirstEnergy, have been charged with paying a US$4.3 million bribe to the former chair of the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio, Mike Randazzo. Randazzo was also charged but recently died. Other texts reveal DeWine and Lieutenant-Governor Jon Husted as strong supporters of House Bill 6, legislation that provided subsidies for two FirstEnergy nuclear plants and two Ohio Valley Electric Corporation coal plants. A spokesperson for DeWine said he had not solicited a donation for State Solutions, which would be a breach of campaign finance laws. DeWine has not been charged with any offences.(Cleveland.com,News5 Cleveland)Canadian coal mine fined for over 400 water pollution violations:British Columbia’s Ministry of Environment and Climate Change has fined Conuma Resources C$45,850 (US$33,430) for breaches of environmental regulations between 2020 and 2023 at its Brule metallurgical coal mine in north-eastern British Columbia. The ministry found Conuma Resources breached the requirement to monitor water emissions into fish-bearing streams on 406 occasions between October 21, 2020, and January 1 2023. Environmental Management Act director Jason Bourgeois imposed a penalty of C$10,000 (US$7290) for the water pollution breaches and added a penalty of C$32,700 (US$23,840) for the company’s failure to collect and test water samples. The company was also fined C$1100 (US$802) for failing to submit monthly reports and water quality monitoring data and C$4750 (US$3465) for excessive dust emissions.(CBC)Report urges changes to Vietnam’s transition plan:A review of Vietnam’s US$15.5 billion Just Energy Transition Partnership (JETP) argues that the project lacks emphasis on the ‘just’ element of the country’s energy transition and does not canvass a timetable for phasing out coal. The report by International Rivers and members of the Vietnam Climate Defenders Coalition emphasised that the Vietnamese government has not made specific commitments to retire any of its existing coal plants. Vietnam has 25 operating coal plants with a combined capacity of 27,239 MW, according to the Global Coal Plant Tracker. A further three plants are under construction with four more proposed. The JETP was announced in December 2022 by the UK and other governments to support Vietnam’s “green transition”. The report argues that the JETP suffers from a lack of apparent coordination between a myriad of domestic and international agencies and does not address the importance of consultation with civil society. In the last few years, Vietnam has arrested and imprisoned six leaders of climate and energy civil society groups. Two of the six, Dang Dinh Bach and Hoang Thi Minh Hong, remain imprisoned. The report calls for their release and for the JETP to ensure civil society groups can participate freely and safely in the transition planning and implementation processes.(International Rivers)NewsAustralia:The Environment Council of Central Queensland hasappliedto the High Court of Australia for leave to appeal against a federal court ruling dismissing a challenge against the approval of two coal mines.China:Latest government datarevealsthat coal and gas generation fell by four per cent in May due to a surge in hydro power, with increased wind and solar generation covering most new demand growth.Greece:Lignite generationfellto a record low in May, generating just 50 gigawatt-hours, three times lower than the previous record minimum.Indonesia:Four religious organisations havewelcomedthe decision of President Joko Widodo to grant coal and other mining concessions to religious organisations.New Zealand:Bathurst Resources and BT Mining arebackinga push to create a pro-mining planning scheme covering coalfields on the west coast of the South Island.US:A judge hasdismissedan Exxon lawsuit seeking damages against investors even after they withdrew a climate shareholder resolution.Yemen:The Greek-owned coal ship Tutor wasdisabledby missile and drone attacks by the Houthis. The ship, which is carrying 80,000 tonnes of coal, has been abandoned and isreportedlyat risk of sinking.Companies + MarketsUS Energy regulator rebukes country’s largest power cooperative:A scathing initial ruling by Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Judge Scott Hempling castigated the Basin Electric Cooperative for “failing to conduct any serious, expertise-based comparison of the coal units’ prospective costs with the all-in costs of alternative generation portfolios”. Basin Electric Cooperative, the largest US rural electric cooperative, has four coal plants: the 660 MW Leland Olds and the 900 MW Antelope Valley plant in North Dakota, a 719 MW share of the 1700 MW Laramie River Station and the 405 MW Dry Fork Station in Wyoming. Basin Electric also owns a for-profit coal mining subsidiary, Dakota Coal, that supplies coal to the Antelope Valley Station and Leland Olds Station. Hempling’s initial ruling proposed Basin Electric refund US$471.5 million to customers for the costs of the Dakota Gasification Company’s for-profit Great Plains Synfuels Plant that does not supply electricity.(Utility Dive,Federal Energy Regulatory Commission,Sierra Club)Coal power plummets in major US power market:US Energy Information Administration (EIA) data reveals that the capacity factor of the coal fleet in the PJM Interconnection plummeted from 56 per cent in 2013 to 34 per cent in 2023. The EIA notes that in 2013, the coal fleet accounted for 44 per cent of the generation in the market compared to just 14 per cent in 2023. The PJM Interconnection covers 13 eastern US states and Washington DC and is the largest US wholesale electricity market. About 34,000 MW of coal capacity has retired from the market since 2013, with a further 2000 MW converted to other fuel sources. The EIA estimates that 11 coal plants accounted for more than three-quarters of coal generation in the PJM in 2023, with the other 22 plants operating far less frequently as renewables and gas generation increase. The EIA notes that coal plants that stop and start often experience more problems and have higher maintenance costs, which in turn makes them increasingly less competitive in the market.(US Energy Information Administration)US analyst notes renewables keep getting cheaper:A new report by the US-based financial services firm Lazard estimates the unsubsidised cost of the most inexpensive new utility-scale solar and onshore wind projects with storage is about US$60 and US$45 per megawatt-hour (MWh), respectively. The firm estimates that the average cost of operating a coal plant in the US is US$71 per MW/h. While noting little data is available on new coal plants, Lazard estimates coal power would cost between US$69 per MWh and US$168 per MWh. Lazard estimates the range of US utility-scale solar is between US$29 per MWh to US$92 per MWh, onshore wind US$27 per MWh to US$73 per MWh and offshore wind US$74 per MWh and US$139 per MWh. New gas generation costs are estimated at between US$110 and US$228 per MWh from peaking plants and between US$45 and US$108 per MWh from a combined cycle plant. The firm did not estimate the cost of power from small modular reactors but calculated the cost of new-build conventional nuclear, based on the midpoint cost of energy from the two most recent units at the Vogtle nuclear plant in Georgia, at US$190 per MWh.(Renew Economy,Lazard [Pdf])India presses ahead with another round of coal auctions:The Ministry of Coal has announced it plans to auction a further 62 coal blocks in the tenth round of coal auctions without any restriction on the use of coal. In the aftermath of a 2012 Supreme Court ruling that the allocation of coal concessions without an auction was illegal, the government initially restricted the sale of coal blocks to public sector entities, some of which subcontracted coal development to private companies. In recent years, the government has relaxed auction requirements, watered down environmental assessment procedures and shut down civil society groups challenging coal projects. Of the 107 coal blocks sold in the previous nine rounds of auctions, only 11 have begun production. The new government says it is aiming to produce 1.5 billion tonnes of coal a year by the end of the decade. In the year to the end of March, Indian coal production reached 997 million tonnes.(BusinessWorld,LiveMint)Adani’s Australian coal port secures private loans:North Queensland Export Terminal, a subsidiary of Adani’s Australian subsidiary Bravus Australia, has secured A$500 million (US$333 million) from two private funders to refinance debt on the port. The Adani group secured a 99-year lease on the coal export terminal from the Queensland Government in June 2011, with the deal funded by debt. In December 2022, Adani failed to refinance a US$500 million bond issue for the project, forcing it to pay the costs from internal sources. The terms of the loans from Farallon Capital Management and King Street Capital Management, two private funders, are not public but private loans are typically at higher interest rates than major banks. The port is a critical link in Adani’s plan to export 10 million tonnes of coal a year to its Indian power projects.(BusinessWorld)Indonesia extends coal mines after downstream processing pledges:Indonesia’s Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (ESDM) has approved the extension of five major coal mining projects after the companies committed to developing downstream processing projects. Two subsidiaries of Bumi Resources, PT Kaltim Prima Coal and PT Arutmin Indonesia, have proposed to build coal-to-methanol production plants to produce 1.8 million and 2.95 million tonnes of methanol a year, respectively. Despite this, Lana Saria from EDSM said the production of methanol is not viable so these projects will switch to produce ammonia. PT Multi Harapan Utama is proposing to produce 500,000 tonnes of semicoke a year, a home heating product. PT Adaro Indonesia is proposing to build a project to produce 2 million tonnes of methanol and 1.34 million tonnes of dimethyl ether. Indika Energy’s subsidiary PT Kideco Jaya Agung has proposed a coal conversion project to produce 100,000 tonnes of ammonia and 172,000 tonnes of urea. Lana said two other companies, PT Kendilo Coal Indonesia and PT Berau Coal, have also proposed projects, but these have not been approved.(Jakarta Post [paywall])ResourcesCaring for carbon-intensive regions in transition: Using a feminist perspective to create a more just society, Coal Transitions, April 2024. (Pdf)This 10-page paper notes women are underrepresented in the development of just transition strategies and proposes options to design policies in a gender-just manner.“An Assessment of Germany’s Remaining CO2 Budget: Can Germany Still Afford to Destroy Villages to Burn More Coal?”,Environment, Volume 66, 2024 - Issue 4, June 17, 2024.This paper undertakes a detailed review of a fair carbon emissions budget for Germany with a specific focus on the implications for the Garzweiler II in North Rhine-Westphalia (NRW) and Nochten in Lusatia that involve the demolition of more villages.“I got a call saying the police were coming for me”and“They should not believe in the promised land that the Adani company tempts them with”,Adani Watch, June 2024.These two videos document the struggles of struggle to tribal and village leaders to protect the Hasdeo forests from Adani’s coal mines.Share on FacebookShare on TwitterForward to a FriendSubscribe