Campaign URLCopyTwitter0tweetsSubscribePast IssuesRSSTranslateEnglishالعربيةAfrikaansбеларуская мовабългарскиcatalà中文（简体）中文（繁體）HrvatskiČeskyDanskeesti keelNederlandsSuomiFrançaisDeutschΕλληνικήहिन्दीMagyarGaeilgeIndonesiaíslenskaItaliano日本語ភាសាខ្មែរ한국어македонски јазикبهاس ملايوMaltiNorskPolskiPortuguêsPortuguês - PortugalRomânăРусскийEspañolKiswahiliSvenskaעבריתLietuviųlatviešuslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпскиதமிழ்ภาษาไทยTürkçeFilipinoукраї́нськаTiếng ViệtJune 27, 2024Issue 520|View Past IssuesPublished byGlobal Energy MonitorEditor's NoteTherulingof the UK’s highest court that local councils must consider the downstream emissions when considering new fossil fuel projects is a decision with potential implications for new coal mines. The decision comes asMoody’swarns that India’s growing water crisis – triggered in part by the destabilisation of the global climate – could have profound effects on the country and its economy. The hope that Vietnam’s Just Energy Transition Partnership (JETP)markeda turning point away from new coal projects is coming under new pressure with the decision of the Export-Import Bank of Malaysia to throw a financial lifeline to a Malaysian chemical company’s dream of building the 2100 megawatt (MW) Song Hau 2 coal plant. If the plant proceeds, it would likely breach the coal capacity cap of 30,200 MW by 2030 referred to in the agreement.As South Africa’s re-elected President Cyril Ramaphosa struggles to finalise his cabinet, the country faces new challenges with the state-owned power utility Eskom. Aleakeddraft memo suggests the utility is considering applying for electricity price increases of up to 44 per cent over three years from early 2025. The regulator is unlikely to approve such a significant increase, but that Eskom thinks it necessary is indicative of its financial crisis. The utility’s financial woes come as the outgoing environment ministerapprovedEskom’s bid to exempt five coal plants from sulphur dioxide pollution controls first announced in 2010. In the wake of the decision, Eskom announced it now wants even more plants exempted from the emissions standards, a move that would cost thousands of lives.FeaturesThe harsh life at the coal face of Adani’s Talabira mineMost of the thousands of villagers displaced by Adani’s Talabira coal mine in Odisha have chosen not to live in the soulless re-settlement colony, which is devoid of greenery and basic amenities,writesAyaskant Das inAdani Watch.Top NewsUK court says climate impact of burning fossil fuels must be considered:The Supreme Court found by a 3-2 majority that the greenhouse gas emissions caused by the burning of fossil fuels must be considered by councils when considering applications for fossil fuel projects. Sarah Finch, a member of the Weald Action Group, challenged Surrey County Council’s 2019 decision to grant planning permission for oil production at Horse Hill over 25 years, including from four new wells. Finch argued the council should have considered all downstream emissions from Horse Hill Developments’ proposed project, not just emissions on the production site. The High Court and the Court of Appeal rejected Finch’s appeals, but the latest decision by the highest UK court has potential implications for other fossil fuel projects. West Cumbria Mining, the company proposing the Whitehaven metallurgical coal mine in Cumbria, intervened in the case in support of the majority of the Court of Appeal. The High Court will hear challenges against the Whitehaven mine between the 16thand 18thof July.(Guardian,The Supreme Court,Friends of the Earth UK,Weald Action Group)Rating agency warns on Indian water shortage:The financial services firm Moody’s has warned that India’s worsening water shortage for households, business and agricultural sectors will pose significant risks to the country’s economy and social stability. Moody’s warned that prolonged heatwaves and water shortages affect the credit rating of the country “as well as sectors that heavily consume water, such as coal power generators and steel-makers”. India’s Ministry of Water Resources classifies water availability of below 1700 cubic metres per capita as indicative of water stress and 1000 cubic metres as the threshold for water scarcity. The ministry estimated water availability at 1486 cubic meters in 2021 and estimates it could fall to 1367 by 2031.(Reuters,Moody’s [paywall])Malaysian company races against deadline for Vietnamese coal plant:In a statement to the Malaysian stock exchange, Toyo Ventures Holdings announced it had secured US$980 million to part-finance the construction of the 2100 MW Song Hau 2 coal plant in Vietnam. The Export-Import Bank of Malaysia secured finance for i-Power Solutions to supply equipment and services for the project. The company first proposed the plant in 2008 but, despite government approvals, has struggled to gain financial support. In early April, Vietnam’s Ministry of Industry and Trade warned Toyo Ventures, a subsidiary of a Malaysian ink and chemicals company, that it would suspend the project unless it achieved financial close by June 30. The project is estimated to cost US$2.68 billion, but the balance of finance for the project remains unclear. In December 2022, Vietnam entered into a Just Energy Transition Partnership with a coalition of financing countries and institutions with the intent of capping coal generation capacity at 30,200 MW by 2030. Christina Ng from the Energy Shift Institute estimates that the construction of the Song Hau 2 plant could exceed the cap given the capacity of the current coal fleet and projects under construction.(Bloomberg [paywall]),Energy Shift Institute,Toyo Ventures Holdings,Global Energy Monitor)Eskom wins exemption from air standard for five plants, seeks more:The week before the South African election, the Minister of Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment, Barbara Creecy, approved Eskom’s application to exempt five coal plants from minimum emission standards that the government announced in 2010. The standards required the installation of sulphur dioxide (SO2) emissions controls by 2015. Creecy decided the 1200 MW Hendrina, 3000 MW Kriel, 600 MW Grootvlei, 1600 MW Camden, and 2352 MW Arnot coal plants could operate until 2030 without meeting the standards. The 2019 Integrated Resource Plan (IRP) proposed shutting the plants this decade, with the latest draft plan proposing deferring the closures until 2030. Having won Creecy’s approval for the exemption of the five plants, Eskom has indicated that it intends to apply for exemptions for the 3600 MW Matla, 3000 MW Duvha, 3654 MW Tutuka, and the 4116 MW Kendal coal plants that it plans to operate beyond 2030. In early 2023, the Centre for Research on Energy and Clean Air (CREA) estimated that Eskom’s coal fleet would cause an estimated 79,500 air pollution-related deaths from 2025 until the retirement of the plants. CREA estimated compliance with the standards after 2030 would avoid 2300 deaths per year caused by air pollution.(Engineering News)Texts shed light on the role of Ohio officials in bailout scandal:Recently released documents reveal that OhioLieutenant GovernorJon Husted was in close contact with former FirstEnergy CEO Chuck Jones and executive Michael Dowling before he was elected. The messages also indicate FirstEnergy, which spent US$61 million to win support for House Bill 6 that bailed out the utility’s nuclear plants, reported Husted was one of the critical officials pressing for the legislation. The final bill also included subsidies for two coal plants. In one message, FirstEnergy executives referred to Husted and others as “fighting to the end, and we’ve been talking to them all day”. A spokesperson for Husted said the messages are “people talking about him; not with him.” Former FirstEnergy executive Michael Dowling, who is facing a dozen charges including bribery, has flagged he could call DeWine and Husted to testify as witnesses in the trial. Dowling has pleaded not guilty on all charges. While DeWine is dealing with the ongoing discovery of text messages linking him to indicted FirstEnergy executives, Republican lawmakers are drafting legislation requiring greater campaign finance disclosure.(Ohio Capital Journal)NewsAustralia:Peabody Energy is permitted todemolishfive houses a year in the village of Wollar near its Wilpinjong Mine in New South Wales. The company is now proposing to build a 100-person temporary workers’ accommodation in the town.Australia:A subsidiary of Fitzroy Mining operating the Carborough Downs underground metallurgical coal mine has beenfinedA$720,000 (US$479,000) over the death of a worker and injury of another.China:The Ministry of Emergency Managementsaid37 people, including local officials, have been punished over a methane explosion at a coal mine in Anhui province that killed nine and injured 15 workers.India:Eastern Coalfields hascommencedtest drilling to gather data for the possible development of a coal gasification project in the Kasta coal block in Jharkhand.India:Singareni Collieries Company (SCCL) isaimingto commence work on the Naini coal block in Odisha within the next three months. SCCL is proposing the mine supply a new 1600 MW coal plant.Laos:Prime Minister Sonexay Siphandonesaidthe Phonesack Group should provide more funding for improving local infrastructure and the living standards of local people near its Xekong mine. The mine is to supply a mine-mouth power plant and for exports.Mongolia:Mongoliaexported37.7 million tonnes of coal to China in the first half of 2024, up 38.5 per cent on the same period the year before.US:Skeens Enterprises, the companycontractedby Lexington Coal Company, was fined US$31,500 for safety violations that resulted in the death of two workers when a coal preparation plant collapsed during demolition.US:A Government Accountability Officereporthas found some proposals from states and tribes to clean up abandoned coal mining sites have been subject the lengthy delays due to poor procedures at the Department of the Interior’s Office of Surface Mining Reclamation.US:The North American Electric Reliability Corporationhas foundincreased outage rates for coal plants due to reduced maintenance on older coal units and increased ramping up and down as renewable generation grows.Yemen:The Greek-owned Tutor, which was carrying about 80,000 tonnes of coal, hassunkat the mouth of the Red Sea after a Houthi seaborne drone strike. A security analyst said the owner of the ship had previously sent another vessel to Israel, likely making the Tutor a target of the pro-Palestinian Houthis.Companies + MarketsLeaked memo reveals Eskom’s plan for another big power price hike:A May 2024 internal memo suggests Eskom is considering applying to the National Energy Regulator of South Africa (Nersa) for significant power price increases to apply from April 1, 2025. A memo leaked to theDaily Maverickflags the option of seeking increases in the standard tariff for customers supplied by Eskom of 36.15 per cent, 11.81 per cent and 9.10 per cent in the 2026, 2027 and 2028 financial years, respectively. On previous occasions, Nersa has granted far lower increases than sought by Eskom. Eskom argues that price increases are required to cover increased generation costs as a result of fewer renewables and other projects envisaged in the 2019 Integrated Resource Plan. Eskom’s power sales have declined in recent years due to load shedding and rapid price increases, driving increased deployment of rooftop solar and industrial self-generation.(Daily Maverick)Philippines official backs running coal plants for their technical life:Philippines Secretary of Energy, Raphael Lotilla, has rejected criticism of the government’s qualified moratorium on new coal plants by insisting that 6300 MW of coal capacity could operate for “at least” another 30 years. Lotilla said that the 3400 MW of plants aged between 10 and 30 years old would operate for at least another ten years as the government’s emphasis is on maximising the utilisation of existing plants. Some companies and legislators are pressing to end the 2020 policy that excluded consideration of new coal plants beyond the 2255 MW of additional coal capacity already committed or under assessment. Lotilla said the lack of interest in new coal projects is due to “the scarcity of financing, higher insurance costs and the risks of carbon taxes and carbon pricing”. The government initiated the moratorium to reduce the country’s heavy reliance on coal plants, with most coal imported. Gerry Arances from the Power for People Coalition said the government’s emphasis on running coal plants for their technical life is “irrational”, given their contribution to global heating and the high costs imposed on consumers.(Philippines Inquirer,Philstar)Australian super fund weakens policy and buys into coal miner:Research by Market Forces has found that one Australian superannuation fund, Vision Super, amended its policy commitment to quit investing in companies that earned more than 25 per cent of their revenue from thermal coal mining. The policy, which the fund amended in 2023, now states that it “may” exclude investing in companies over the threshold. After the change, the fund’s Balanced Growth investment option disclosed it has invested in Whitehaven Coal, one of the largest Australian coal producers which has plans for six major coal mine expansions. Market Forces note that after Whitehaven purchased the Blackwater and Daunia metallurgical coal mines from BHP, the company claimed the deal transformed the company “into a metallurgical coal producer” that would earn only 30 per cent of its revenue from thermal coal. Market Forces found that five Australian superannuation funds – Commonwealth Super, NGS Super, TelstraSuper, Spirit Super and Super SA – could reinvest in Whitehaven because of the thresholds used in their current policies.(Australian Financial Review [paywall],Market Forces)Australian opposition backs nukes policy and capping renewables:The leader of the opposition Liberal Party has unveiled an uncosted policy to build seven nuclear plants at the sites of retiring coal plants, with the first, a small modular reactor, to be commissioned in 2035. There are currently no commercial small modular reactors in operation. Australia’s peak science agency, the CSIRO, recently estimated that a nuclear plant would take at least 15 years to develop with electricity generated at between A$163 per megawatt-hour (MWh) (US$108/MWh) to A$264/MWh (US$176/MWh). CSIRO estimated the levelised cost of firmed new wind and solar projects at between A$73/MWh (US$49 MW/h) and A$128/MWh (US$85/MWh) in 2030 a megawatt hour with renewables at between 60 and 90 per cent of generation. David Littleproud, the leader of the National Party, which is in coalition with the Liberal Party, said a Lberal-National Party government would “cap” investments in renewables and argued that Australia doesn’t need “large-scale industrial wind farms”. The Minerals Council of Australia – which represents members including coal and uranium mining companies – welcomed the coalition’s decision as a “sensible option” that will “cost-effectively” reduce emissions. Analysts expect the coalition’s policy would require the life extension of existing coal plants, a dramatic increase in gas generation, limiting renewables investment and curtailing rooftop solar generation.(RenewEconomy,Guardian,Peter Dutton,Minerals Council of Australia)Indian imports of Russian thermal coal slips:Indian imports of Russian thermal coal plummeted by 67 per cent in the three months to the end of May, according to data compiled by Bigmint, a consultancy group. Over the period, all Indian coal imports from Russia fell by 22.4 per cent to 6.76 million tonnes, but metallurgical coal imports increased. After China, India is the largest destination for Russian coal exports. Russia’s thermal coal sales to India increased after sanctions curtailed demand in Europe and Japan, leading exporters to offer significant discounts. More recently, the discounts offered on Russian coal have not kept up with falling prices in the global export market. Rising transport charges have also hit Russian exporters. The downturn comes as the first two coal trains from Russia completed the trip to the Iranian port of Bandar Abbas via Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan.(Reuters,Azerbaycan24)Captive plants could account for over half of Indonesia’s coal capacity:A report by the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis (IEEFA) finds that two Indonesian banks, Bank Mandiri and Bank Permata, are principal backers of a slew of new Indonesian coal projects. Indonesia’s seven largest coal producers – including Adaro Energy, Bayan Resources and PT Bukit Asam – produced almost 217 million tonnes of coal in 2023. While the high profits of the last two years have resulted in companies boosting dividends to investors rather than reinvesting in the coal business, Bayan Resources and Geo Energy have plans to increase coal mining capacity by up to 58 million tonnes a year. As part of the government’s push for downstream processing of minerals, Adaro Energy has invested in an aluminium smelting plant powered by 2300 MW of captive coal capacity with another 2300 MW under consideration. IEEFA estimates that the current 13,000 MW of captive coal plants represents about 32 per cent of Indonesia’s 2023 coal-fired capacity. A further 21,000 MW of captive coal capacity is under consideration, which would lift captive capacity to more than half the country’s coal capacity.(Institute for Energy Economics & Financial Analysis)ResourcesGlobal Integrated Power Tracker, Global Energy Monitor, June 2024.Global Energy Monitor has launched the Global Integrated Power Tracker, a multi-sector dataset of power stations and facilities worldwide. The tracker provides unit-level information on thermal power (coal, oil, gas, nuclear, geothermal, bioenergy) and renewables (solar, wind, hydro).Share on FacebookShare on TwitterForward to a FriendSubscribe