Campaign URLCopyTwitter0tweetsSubscribePast IssuesRSSTranslateEnglishالعربيةAfrikaansбеларуская мовабългарскиcatalà中文（简体）中文（繁體）HrvatskiČeskyDanskeesti keelNederlandsSuomiFrançaisDeutschΕλληνικήहिन्दीMagyarGaeilgeIndonesiaíslenskaItaliano日本語ភាសាខ្មែរ한국어македонски јазикبهاس ملايوMaltiNorskPolskiPortuguêsPortuguês - PortugalRomânăРусскийEspañolKiswahiliSvenskaעבריתLietuviųlatviešuslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпскиதமிழ்ภาษาไทยTürkçeFilipinoукраї́нськаTiếng ViệtJuly 4, 2024Issue 521|View Past IssuesPublished byGlobal Energy MonitorEditor's NoteA Canadianstudysheds new light on the issue of coal dust emissions from open cut mines. The study found evidence of dust up to 60 kilometres from Teck Resources mines in the Elk Valley in British Columbia. Glencore, which is in the process of buying the mines from Teck, has also been in the news. Legal & General Investment Managementannouncedthey are selling their stake in Glencore over its failure to address concerns about its thermal coal production.In the US, debate over a raft of decisions by the conservative-dominated Supreme Court overshadowed a lower court decisionrejectinga challenge to the Environmental Protection Agency’s coal ash rule. The flurry ofdecisionsby the Supreme Court raises the prospect that hard-won gains are now vulnerable to challenges by industry groups and utilities. A new Global Energy Monitorreporthighlights the urgent need to curb methane emissions from abandoned coal mines in Europe. In South Africa, theappointmentof a new South African minister for energy offers hope that the much-criticised draft power plan could be substantially improved.FeaturesBritish Columbia’s toxic coal dust invades AlbertaA study demonstrating the long-distance dispersal of coal dust from Teck’s Elk Valley mines in British Columbia has bolstered opposition to coal mining in the eastern slopes of Alberta,writesAndrew Nikiforuk inThe Tyee.Top NewsReport finds abandoned European mines are big methane polluters:A report by Global Energy Monitor (GEM) estimates underground coal mines closed in European Union (EU) countries since 2015 could emit 298 million cubic metres of methane a year, with Polish mines the worst offenders. GEM estimates that the 16 Polish mines closed since 2015 release about 110 million cubic metres a year, almost 37 per cent of the EU total. Recently closed mines in the Czech Republic and Germany account for 90 and 55 million cubic metres of methane a year, respectively. The report estimates that six mines, the CSA and Darkov coal mines in the Czech Republic, the Auguste Victoria Colliery and Prosper-Haniel Mine in Germany, and Poland’s KWK Mysłowice-Wesoła I and KWK Rydułtowy I mines, account for about half of all the methane emissions from the EU’s abandoned underground coal mines.(Global Energy Monitor [Pdf])US court rejects appeal against coal ash rule:The US Court of Appeals has rejected two legal appeals against a 2015 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulation banning the closure of coal ash dumps where groundwater is in contact with the ash. One appeal challenged EPA concerns about coal ash dams at coal plants in Ohio, Indiana, Puerto Rico, Kentucky, Kansas, Iowa, and Georgia. The other lawsuit related to Lightstone’s 2600 megawatt (MW) Gavin coal plant in Ohio, where the EPA determined coal ash is sitting in up to 64 feet (19.5 metres) of groundwater.(Power Magazine)US Supreme Court rulings cast a shadow over environmental regulations:Three recent decisions of the conservative-dominated US Supreme Court have overturned long-established precedents and cast a shadow over many environmental and other regulations. The Supreme Court overturned the 1982 ‘Chevron deference’ under which judges could allow federal agencies to interpret ambiguous law as long as new regulatory standards are ‘reasonable’. The decision dramatically expands the role of judges in deciding the application of regulatory standards and could have sweeping implications for standards such as power plant emissions standards. In another decision, the court set aside the six-year statute of limitations for legal challenges under the Administrative Procedure Act. The court ruled that the six-year window applies not to when the regulation came into force but when a plaintiff was adversely affected by it. Earthjustice warned that the decision opens the door to the creation of new companies to challenge long-settled regulations. In another decision, the court suspended the Environmental Protection Agency’s ‘Good Neighbour Plan’ that requires upwind sources of pollution, such as power stations, to cut emissions that contribute to smog in downwind states. The decision allows pollution to increase while the US Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit hears an appeal against the plan.(Scientific American,E & E News,Earthjustice,AP,Earthjustice)Study finds coal dust from Canadian mines crosses provincial border:A study has found that coal dust was detected in the snowpack up to 60 kilometres downwind from four open-cut Teck Resources mines in British Columbia. The study published inEnvironmental Science & Technology Lettersconcluded that “vast quantities” of polycyclic aromatic compounds (PACs) are transported downwind from the mines. The study by researchers from the University of Alberta and officers from Alberta’s Ministry ofEnvironment and Protected Areaswas conducted over two winters and detected PAC concentrations ranging between less than 10 micrograms per square metre (μg/m2) at sites over 50 kilometres from the mines to more than 1000 μg/m2 at sites in the Elk River valley. One site near the mines had PAC concentrations of more than 15,000 μg/m2. The study found evidence of black bands of dust visible in the snowpack throughout the winter. The study notes that the governments of British Columbia and Canada do not require Teck Resources to report on atmospheric emissions of PACs. The authors also stated that modelling suggested that airborne pollutants from the mines could be deposited across western Canada and the northwestern United States.(Environmental Science and Technology Letters)New South African energy minister, same mining minister:President Cyril Ramaphosa has appointed Kgosientsho Ramokgopa as the minister for both electricity and energy, portfolios that two ministers previously handled. Gwede Mantashe, the previous Minister for Resources and Energy, is now the minister for  Mineral and Petroleum Resources. Energy analyst Chris Yelland welcomed the move as an acknowledgement of Ramokgopa’s success in ending load shedding but described Mantashe’s performance as minister for energy as “underwhelming”. A priority of the new Department of Electricity and Energy will be finalising the 2023 draft Integrated Resource Plan (IRP) for electricity that was widely criticised by energy analysts, the renewables sector and civil society groups. Dion George from the Democratic Alliance, one of the other parties in the Government of National Unity headed by the African National Congress, replaces Barbara Creecy as the Minister of Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment.(Daily Maverick,South African Government)Study finds Indonesia's Just Transition plan neglects pollution impacts:The Centre for Research Energy and Clear Air (CREA) estimates the two coal plants identified in Indonesia’s Just Energy Transition Partnership (JETP) investment plan as pilot plants for early closure, along with another mentioned as a likely candidate for early retirement, cause up to 1263 deaths a year. CREA estimates air pollution from the three plants – the 660 MW Cirebon Unit 1, the 1050 MW Pelabuhan Ratu plant and the 1600 MW Banten Suralaya Units 1-4 – impose an economic burden of US$885 million (13.1 trillion rupiah) per year. The report notes that the three plants account for only 20 per cent of the death toll of the top ten most polluting coal plants in Java. CREA notes that the current plan does not schedule any reduction in coal capacity between 2025 and 2035, even though there is 7400 MW of grid-connected coal capacity that should retired by 2035 based on a 30-year lifetime.(Indonesia Business Post,Centre for Research on Energy and Clean Air)Indian villagers at risk of displacement if coal block sale proceeds:Residents and farmers fear that thousands of people will be adversely affected if the Indian government successfully sells off the Shravanapalli coal block in Telangana state. Residents and farmers have opposed the development of coal mining in the area for 20 years. Residents estimate that 240 families are at risk of displacement if the project proceeds with another 1200 households in other villages that are likely to be affected by dust from mining operations. Singareni Collieries Company estimates the mine would require 1936 hectares of land, of which just over half is private land. Farmers estimate about 500 hectares of mango groves in Shravanapalli and surrounding areas would be affected by the project. The block is estimated to contain about 94 million tonnes of coal.(Telangana Today)NewsAfghanistan:Uzbek investors haveexpressedinterest in developing coal mines and power stations in Afghanistan.Australia:Anglo American’s Grosvenor underground metallurgical coal mine is onfire, with the company struggling to seal mine shafts. Residents of Moranbah have been advised to stay indoors as smoke blankets the town.India:A senior official of Eastern Coalfields, a Coal India subsidiary, wasarrestedby the Central Bureau of Investigation over alleged involvement in a coal smuggling case in West Bengal. Two coal traders were also arrested.India:The Tamil Nadu government hasordereda preliminary investigation into allegations that the Adani Group sold low-grade coal to the Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation but charged the utility for high-grade coal.Kazakhstan:The Kazakh Ministry of Industry and Constructionsaysexports to Europe have increased dramatically after European Union sanctions were imposed on Russian coal imports.Malawi:Coal from Moatize in Mozambique has successfully beenexportedto a cement plant in Malawi after the redevelopment of the rail connection to Lilongwe.Pakistan:Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharifwantsgovernment agencies to develop a coal gasification strategy for Thar lignite deposits as an alternative fuel source for imported coal plants.UK:Uniper’s Ratcliffe-on-Soar hasreceivedits last shipment of coal. The plant, which was commissioned in 1967, is scheduled to close on September 30.US:The United Mine Workers of America hascondemneda budget provision moved by Congressional Republicans to ban the Department of Labor from enforcing a silica dust rule developed to protect coal miners.Zimbabwe:A Chinese investor hasthreatenedto abandon the US$40 million Hwange Coal Gasification Company after a court order allowed a former business partner to take 5800 tonnes of coke from the company’s processing plant.Companies + MarketsGlobal financial services provider dumps Glencore stake:Legal & General Investment Management (LGIM) announced that its investment management unit is selling its 0.44 per cent stake in Glencore, the world’s largest exporter of thermal coal. The decision to exit from the controversial commodities company follows a May 2023 shareholder resolution requiring Glencore to disclose how its role in producing thermal coal aligned with the Paris Agreement goal of limiting the global temperature increase to 1.5 °C. At the company’s 2023 annual general meeting, 29.22 per cent of the shares voted backed a call for Glencore to explain how its production of thermal coal aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement. The resolution was co-filed by LGIM. “We remain concerned that Glencore does not meet our red line asking mining companies to disclose whether they plan to increase thermal coal capacity,” LGIM said, announcing its decision to divest. Glencore is currently in the process of acquiring Teck Resources metallurgical coal mines in British Columbia.(Reuters)Chinese offshore wind farm undercuts coal price:A 306 MW offshore wind farm has been approved after agreeing to supply electricity at 27 per cent below the coal power price benchmark. The project agreement is the first time that an offshore wind project has undercut the cost of coal generation.  China Three Gorges Corporation and China National Offshore Oil Corporation head the consortium backing the project near Shanghai. BloombergNEF estimates China’s offshore wind generation may triple capacity to 129,000 MW by 2030. Offshore wind projects have been hampered by intense price competition between proponents and the declining cost of onshore wind generation.(Financial Express)A surge in Chinese hydro sees ports clogged with coal stockpiles:The global shipbroking firm BRS says China’s coal terminals are reaching capacity due to increased hydro generation, which has slowed demand for coal. The declining price of seaborne thermal coal also stimulated utilities to restock coal supplies ahead of summer. BRS estimated that by the end of May Chinese ports had about 160 million tonnes of coal stockpiled. The broker reported that in the first five months of 2024, China imported 205 million tonnes of coal, up 12.6 per cent compared to the year before, with almost 45 per cent coming from Indonesia. BRS said the coal terminals at Lianyungang and Guangzhou are full, causing delays in unloading new cargoes. If high inventory levels persist over China’s summer, there is likely to be reduced demand for thermal coal imports from Indonesia, Australia and Russia.(Splash247)Coal’s share of generation grew in Indonesia and the Philippines in 2023:A review of electricity generation in 2023 in the Philippines and Indonesia found the share of coal generation increased in both countries. The UK-based energy think-tank Ember found that in the Philippines, the share of coal generation in 2023 increased by 2.8 per cent to 61.9 per cent compared to the year before. While electricity demand in the Philippines increased by 5.2 terawatt hours (TWh) in 2023, coal generation increased by 6.5 TWh, a 9.7 per cent increase, as it offset a decline in gas and other fossil fuel generation. Wind and solar generation increased by 0.9 TWh, a 31 per cent increase. In Indonesia, electricity demand increased by 5.1 per cent or 17.1 TWh, with coal generation accounting for 11.5 TWh or just over two-thirds of the increase. Gas generation accounted for the bulk of the remainder of increased demand. Solar and wind generation have only increased by 1.2 TWh since the 2015 Paris Agreement, in large part due to limited support from the government and the publicly owned utility PLN.(The Straits Times,Ember)US short seller rejects claims of Indian regulator over Adani report:The US-based Hindenburg Research has revealed it has been sent a 46-page page ‘show cause’ notice by the Securities & Exchange Board of India (SEBI) over its early 2023 short selling of Adani’s related bonds. In January 2023, Hindenburg Research released a detailed report that alleged Adani-related companies breached restrictions on disclosure of related-party transactions. The report triggered a collapse in the value of listed Adani companies, though Hindenburg said that it only made US$4.1 million in gross revenue from an arrangement with an investor and just US$31,000 short selling the company’s US bonds. In its response, Hindenburg Research dismissed SEBI’s claims and accused the regulator of “seemingly doing more to protect those perpetrating fraud than to protect the investors being victimised by it”. The Supreme Court of India set a deadline of August 14 for SEBI to complete its investigation into Hindenburg’s allegations.(Mint,Business Today,Hindenburg Research,Securities & Exchange Board of India)Vietnam to develop a coal conveyor to export coal from Laos: The government of Quang Tri Province in Vietnam has approved the construction of a six-kilometre-long conveyor system to export up to 30 million tonnes of coal a year from Laos. The US$63 million conveyor project aims to relieve congestion at the La Lay International Border Gate between the two countries, with up to 450 coal trucks crossing the border in a day. Nam Tien Company has proposed developing two further conveyor links, one to a coal mine in Sekong province in Laos and another to the proposed My Thuy Seaport in Vietnam.(Tuoi Tre News,Vietnamnet)ResourcesGreen electrification of Indian industries for clean energy gains, Ember, June 2024. (Pdf)This 28-page report focuses on decarbonising India’s steel, cement, aluminium, petrochemicals and ammonia industries.Set and forget: How offsets under national environmental law drive habitat destruction, Australian Conservation Foundation, July 2024. (Pdf)This 34-page report investigates the Australian government’s environmental offsets scheme. The report notes how Glencore gained approval for the expansion of its Ulan coal mine in 2010, but the agreed offsets have been weakened and delayed.Share on FacebookShare on TwitterForward to a FriendSubscribe