Campaign URLCopyTwitter0tweetsSubscribePast IssuesRSSTranslateEnglishالعربيةAfrikaansбеларуская мовабългарскиcatalà中文（简体）中文（繁體）HrvatskiČeskyDanskeesti keelNederlandsSuomiFrançaisDeutschΕλληνικήहिन्दीMagyarGaeilgeIndonesiaíslenskaItaliano日本語ភាសាខ្មែរ한국어македонски јазикبهاس ملايوMaltiNorskPolskiPortuguêsPortuguês - PortugalRomânăРусскийEspañolKiswahiliSvenskaעבריתLietuviųlatviešuslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпскиதமிழ்ภาษาไทยTürkçeFilipinoукраї́нськаTiếng ViệtJuly 11, 2023Issue 522|View Past IssuesPublished byGlobal Energy MonitorEditor's NoteOne of five big proposed coal plants inVietnammay well be on its last legs. Vietnam’s Ministry of Industry and Trade has finally terminated the agreement for the 2100 megawatt (MW) Song Hau 2 coal plant. The plant has struggled to gain financial backing for years and was an odd project for a Malaysian chemicals company with no experience in the power sector. The resoundingdefeatof the UK Conservative government may undercut the prospects for any new coal mine proposals, but the Labour Party has said little about the Whitehaven coal project approved by the outgoing government. The fate of that mine hinges on the outcome of a Supreme Court hearing next week. InBulgaria, the loss-making Maritsa Istok 3 lignite plant has laid off the bulk of its remaining staff.InSouth Africa, the newly appointed minister for energy has vowed to “be ultra-aggressive” in pursuing the expansion of renewables. InIndia, the recently returned government of Prime Minister Narendra Modi is lobbying major public and private power utilities to press ahead with equipment orders for up to 31,000 megawatts (MW) of new generation capacity, mostly coal plants. The government is also investigating the potential for the export ofMongolianmetallurgical coal to India via Russian ports.CoalWirewill take a one-week break and return on July 25.FeaturesOutrage as Modi government revisits quashed coal-mine approval at Gare Pelma IIA committee appointed by the Modi government is reviewing the approval process for the Gare Pelma II mine in Chhattisgarh despite a National Green Tribunal ruling earlier this year that overturned the environmental approval for the project,writesAyaskant Das inAdani Watch.Top NewsVietnam cancels concession for Malaysian-backed coal plant:Vietnam’s Ministry of Industry and Trade (MOIT) has terminated the agreement with Toyo Ventures Holdings for the 2100 MW Song Hau 2 thermal power plant. In early April, Vietnam’s Ministry of Industry and Trade warned Toyo Ventures, a subsidiary of a Malaysian ink and chemicals company, that it would suspend the project unless it achieved financial close by June 30. MOIT cancelled the agreement on July 1, despite Toyo recently announcing that it had secured US$980 million from the Export-Import Bank of Malaysia to finance equipment and services for the project. The company first proposed the plant in 2008 but, despite government approvals, has struggled to gain financial support for the US$2.68 billion project. Toyo Ventures shares on the Malaysian Stock Exchange fell by about 25 per cent after the announcement. The Song Hau 2 plant was one of five plants mentioned in Vietnam’s 2021-2030 Power Development Plan as potential candidates for cancellation. A climate policy analyst from the Senik Centre Asia, Andri Prasetiyo, noted that the project could still proceed as the US$15 billion Just Energy Transition Partnership allows negotiation over cancelled projects “where appropriate”.(The Edge Malaysia,Eco-Business [registration required],Toyo Ventures)UK election sees Conservative loss in seat of proposed new coal mine:The collapse of the vote of the Conservative party extended to the seat of Whitehaven and Workington, a new electorate that includes the site of West Cumbria Mining’s proposed Whitehaven metallurgical coal mine. Labour’s Josh MacAlister defeated the conservative candidate, Andrew Johnson, who had enthusiastically backed the mine. During the election campaign, the Labour Party said it is opposed to the development of new coal mines, but MacAlister declined to comment on the government’s response if the High Court rules in favour of the Whitehaven mine. The High Court will hear challenges against the mine between the 16th and 18th of July. West Cumbria Mining intervened in a recent court challenge against Surrey County Council’s 2019 decision to grant planning permission for oil production at Horse Hill. In that case, the Supreme Court found by a 3-2 majority that councils must assess the greenhouse gas emissions caused by the burning of fossil fuels when considering applications for fossil fuel projects.(Whitehaven News,BBC,South Lakes Action on Climate Change)South African energy minister promises rapid growth in renewables:The newly appointed Minister of Electricity and Energy, Kgosientsho Ramokgopa, has vowed to pursue a rapid expansion of renewables capacity. “I am going to be ultra-aggressive on the renewable energy side … you are going to see an exponential share of renewables in the energy mix. And we need to signal to the market our intention to go that route,” Ramokgopa said. The precise role of the Department of Electricity and Energy is yet to be finalised, but Ramokgopa is likely to have responsibility for the Integrated Resource Plan. South Africa’s newly appointed Minister of Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment, Dion George, the former finance spokesperson for the centre-right Democratic Alliance, said that “the big issue” is the just energy transition and financing for new energy projects. George will have carriage of crucial issues such as environmental licensing of Eskom coal plants and new coal mines.(Mail & Guardian,Climate Home News,Daily Maverick,EE Business Intelligence)Thai villagers challenge pollution from lignite dump:The district chief of Chiang Khong has ordered the suspension of truck transport of lignite across the border from Laos after more than 200 villagers petitioned government officials over the air and water pollution impacts of the operation. Lignite is carried across the Fourth Thai-Lao Friendship Bridge in Chiang Khong district in uncovered trucks and dumped in a stockpile about five kilometres from the border. Residents of two villages complained that dust pollution from the trucks affected residents, and water from the stockpiles polluted an irrigation canal used by two villages. Villagers argue that the coal storage yard is in a zone in the city plan where hazardous storage is banned. The district chief ordered officials to investigate the zoning of the stockpile and undertake air and pollution tests within the next two weeks.(Thaiger)Activists launch two weeks of protests against Australian coal port:New South Wales police have arrested 30 protestors following two weeks of demonstrations organised by Blockade Australia against shipping coal from Newcastle, the largest export coal port in the world. In 2022, the New South Wales government passed draconian anti-protest legislation removing the right of unauthorised protests to obstruct a bridge, tunnel, road or major facility with penalties of up to two years imprisonment and or an A$22,000 (US$14,800) fine. Most of those arrested were fined between A$750 (US$506) and A$1,500 (US$1010). One protestor was sentenced to three months in jail for blocking a coal loading facility but was later released on strict bail conditions.(Guardian,Blockade Australia)Canadian report flags health concerns over fish consumption:A recently released 406-page health assessment report by Teck Coal consultants found elevated levels of selenium in fish harvested downstream of the company’s five Elk Valley coal mines. The report found that one meal of fish per day — a level considered appropriate by the Ktunaxa Nation — could pose a risk to human health while consuming several servings a month would pose a negligible risk. A summary of the report released in February by the government of British Columbia warned against the use of surface water affected by the mines for drinking and specifically cautioned against its use for making baby formula due to the risk of exposure to nitrates. The study found the risk from the harvesting of berries, deer and other game “at average consumer levels was identified as negligible risk”.(The Narwhal,Teck Coal)Indian power sector faces growing water crisis:The Council on Energy, Environment, and Water (CEEW), a Delhi-based think tank, estimates that water stress – defined as less than 1700 cubic metres per person a year – will become evident by 2025 in 11 of 15 major river basins in India. Nitin Bassi from CEEW said coal plants in eastern India could face water scarcity in the long run if they continue to rely on freshwater. A recent Moody’s report warned that coal power plants and steel mills in India are vulnerable to water stress. Coal plants commonly use large volumes of water for cooling and disposal of coal ash. In 2021, the Centre for Science and Environment estimated that coal power plants accounted for about 70 per cent of India’s industrial water allocations, with about half of the coal fleet located in water-scarce regions. Coal plants can use dry cooling technology, which cuts water use by up to 95 per cent, but this reduces plant efficiency and imposes additional capital costs.(The Print)NewsAustralia:The fire at Anglo American’s Grosvenor underground metallurgical coal mine hasburnedfor five days, with emergency services struggling to close nine openings to the project.Australia:Anglo American isintroducingremote-controlled bulldozers for the management of its coal stockpiles at its five Bowen Basin metallurgical coal mines.Australia:The Foreign Investment Review Board hasapprovedSouth32’s application to sell its Illawarra Metallurgical Coal subsidiary to Singapore’s Golden Energy and Resources (70 per cent) and the coal trader M Resources (30 per cent).Canada:The federal governmentannouncedC$39 million (US$29 million) in grants to support six communities in Alberta affected by the mid-June conversion of Capital Power’s 466 MW Genesee 2 coal unit to run on gas.India:The Ministry of Coal hasdesignated19 coal mines as appropriate to dispose of fly ash from 13 coal plants.India:The federal government has given in principleagreementfor TUECO, a joint venture of UJVN and THDC India, to establish a coal plant in Uttarakhand. The Central Electricity Authority had previously recommended a coal allocation to support a new 1320 MW coal plant.Myanmar:The Mon State Chief Ministerannouncedthe go-ahead for a new coal plant near Chaungzon after a June 24 meeting with the Chinese ambassador.Philippines:Meralco’s call for 600 MW of ‘baseload’ supply hasattractedbids from six coal plant utilities. Meralco is seeking bids for a 15-year agreement starting on August 1, 2025.Taiwan:Coal imports from Russiahave increasedby 31 per cent over the last 12 months compared to the year before.Zambia:The Energy Regulation Board hasapprovedMaamba Collieries proposed 300 MW expansion of the Maamba coal-fired power station. Maamba Collieries is a subsidiary of the Indian company Nava.Companies + MarketsBulgarian lignite plant falters as power prices slump:Contour Global has announced the retrenchment of 160 employees who work at the 908 MW Maritsa Iztok 3 lignite plant. The executive director of the plant said lignite generation costs about €140 (US$152) per megawatt-hour (MWh) compared to the forward price for generation in January 2025 of €90 (US$97) per MWh. Maritsa Iztok 3 is the second-largest coal plant in Bulgaria. In February 2024, the company’s power supply agreement with the state-owned National Electric Company expired, leading the company to retrench about 160 staff. The three Maritsa Iztok plants, each owned by different utilities, are supplied by local lignite mines. Unions and some political leaders have backed a delay in Bulgaria’s proposed climate neutrality roadmap and subsidies for the mines that supply the three plants. Bulgaria’s national election in early June, the sixth election in three years, did little to resolve an ongoing political crisis, with the conservative Gerb party winning the most seats.(Balkan Green Energy News,Global Energy Monitor,European Consortium for Political Research)Indian minister presses utilities to place orders for new plants:India’s Minister for Power, Manohar Lal, has reportedly lobbied major power utilities to place equipment orders aimed at commissioning up to 31,000 MW of new generation capacity within the next five to six years.Reutersreports the minister is pressing state-owned power utilities NTPC, the country’s largest coal generator, and hydro utility Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam, as well as major private companies, including Adani Power and Essar Power, to proceed with orders. India has limited power equipment supply capacity, with the state-owned Bharat Heavy Electricals as the leading supplier. Last year, orders for equipment for 10,000 MW of new capacity were submitted, up from the 2-3,000 MW a year that prevailed in preceding years.(Reuters)India trials coal imports from Mongolia:The Ministry of Steel has proposed trial shipments of up to 300,000 tonnes of coking coal from Mongolia to India via the Trans-Siberian – Mongolian railway to the Russian ports of Vladivostok and Nakhodka. One anonymous participant at the meeting between industry and government officials said exporting coal through China must be avoided. In response to the outbreak of COVID-19, China closed its borders with Mongolia, triggering a crisis in the coal industry. The ministry is seeking an agreement with Indian steel companies on establishing a benchmark pricing scheme for Mongolian coal similar to that used by Japan. A delegation of ministry and steel industry officials plans to visit Mongolia in the near future to assess freight options and whether additional investment is required, such as for a common stockyard for Indian importers. India imported about 58 million tonnes of metallurgical coal in 2023.(The Hindu Businessline)Canadian government approves Glencore’s purchase of Teck mines:The Canadian government has approved Glencore’s US$6.9 billion takeover bid for Elk Valley Resources (EVR), the subsidiary established for Teck Resources metallurgical coal mines. Canada’s Minister for Innovation, Science and Economic Development Minister, François-Philippe Champagne, announced Glencore has agreed to hold environmental responsibility for the coal mine sites until 2050 or obtain prior approval from the minister on a mechanism to ensure EVR’s obligations are covered in the event of a demerger. The company must also engage with Indigenous groups in the Elk Valley. The company agreed to maintain the head office for EVR in Vancouver for a decade, ensure a majority of the company directors are Canadians and maintain “significant employment levels” at the mines for at least five years. The conditions require Glencore to spend “at least C$350 million (US$257 million) on rehabilitation and closure activities”.(Mining Weekly,Glencore [Pdf])Founder of SUEK says coal use infinite if sold for US$20 a tonne:In an interview with far-right US personality Tucker Carlson, the founder of the Siberian Coal Energy Company (SUEK), Andrey Melnichenko, claimed that “there’s nothing bad in using fossil fuels, especially if you can offset emissions out of it”. He told Carlson that “modern coal power plants don’t produce black smoke, they don’t destroy nature” and claimed that if the global price for coal was US$20 per tonne, it could “fly forever”. Melnichenko conceded that coal’s prospects weren’t so rosy if the price was higher. “If the global price will be, say, [US]$30 or $40 [per tonne], that will create a little bit different scenario”. The lowest average annual price for thermal coal in the seaborne market in the last decade was US$58 per tonne in 2015. SUEK, which operates 35 coal mines in Russia, is one of the companies targeted by US sanctions after Russia’s February 2022 invasion of Ukraine. In early 2022, Melnichenko resigned as a director of SUEK and withdrew as a beneficiary of his former 92 per cent stake in the company.(PortNews)Resources“Interactive: Labour government’s in-tray for climate change, energy and nature”,Carbon Brief, July 7, 2024.This guide provides an overview of energy and climate policy issues facing the new Labour government.“France: A look back at the NFP, RN and Renaissance proposals”,EnergyNews,July 6, 2024.This article provides a helpful overview of the critical energy policy pledges of the three main political groups that contested the French election.Share on FacebookShare on TwitterForward to a FriendSubscribe