Campaign URLCopyTwitter0tweetsSubscribePast IssuesRSSTranslateEnglishالعربيةAfrikaansбеларуская мовабългарскиcatalà中文（简体）中文（繁體）HrvatskiČeskyDanskeesti keelNederlandsSuomiFrançaisDeutschΕλληνικήहिन्दीMagyarGaeilgeIndonesiaíslenskaItaliano日本語ភាសាខ្មែរ한국어македонски јазикبهاس ملايوMaltiNorskPolskiPortuguêsPortuguês - PortugalRomânăРусскийEspañolKiswahiliSvenskaעבריתLietuviųlatviešuslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпскиதமிழ்ภาษาไทยTürkçeFilipinoукраї́нськаTiếng ViệtJuly 25, 2024Issue 523|View Past IssuesPublished byGlobal Energy MonitorEditor's NoteThe latest International Energy Agencyupdateon global electricity notes that the rapid increase in renewable capacity, and solar in particular, could generate more power than coal in 2025. However, rapid demand growth in key countries such as China and India is still outpacing renewables and underpinning high levels of coal generation. Newdatasuggests that the end of China’s drought and the surge in hydro generation could crimp coal generation in the last half of the year and result in a marginal decline in greenhouse gas emissions from the power sector this year. In India, the results of aSolar Energy Corporation of Indiatender for 1200 megawatts (MW) of new solar capacity paired with battery storage indicate that the combined technologies can outcompete new coal generation as well as be faster to build.Three new reports reveal encouraging signs of growing momentum for a transition away from coal use in the steel sector. InChina, no new coal-based steel capacity has been approved by provincial authorities this year, raising hopes this could signal a turning point for the country’s steel industry. Global Energy Monitor’s new update on theworldwide steel industrynotes that 93 per cent of recently announced steelmaking projects are for low-emissions electric arc furnace capacity. Asurveyof 500 investors in the steel and related industries found broad acceptance of a transition away from high-emissions steelmaking, with 80 per cent of respondents agreeing metallurgical coal’s risk profile will increase in the next decade.FeaturesLessons from the coal boom that didn’t happenAccording to Global Energy Monitor data, of all the new coal plants that were in development at the time of the Paris Agreement in 2015, 56 per cent were cancelled or suspended as of 2023,writesJoel Jaeger from the World Resources Institute.Tracking G7 climate progress with data from 116,095 power plantsData in the new Global Integrated Power Tracker shows that coal power capacity in G7 countries has fallen 37 per cent since 2010,writesJames Norman from Global Energy Monitor inCarbon Brief.Analysis: China’s clean energy pushes coal to record-low 53 per cent share of power in May 2024Coal generation in May 2024 slumped by seven percentage points compared with the year before,writesLauri Myllyvirta from the Centre for Research on Energy and Clean Air inCarbon Brief.UK court ruling provides support for anti-fossil fuel lawyers worldwideThe recent UK Supreme Court ruling that decision-makers must consider downstream greenhouse gas emissions when assessing new fossil fuel projects is likely to have global implications,writesJoe Lo inClimate Home News.Silica dust levels in coal mines were concealed for years while black lung cases surgedFor decades, miners have come down with black lung disease after inhaling coal dust. But as the layers of coal became thinner, young workers were forced to dig deeper into quartz rock, which generates the silica dust — a carcinogen that has led to the most dangerous spike of black lung in more than a generation,writeMichael Korsh, Phillip Powell and Yiqing Wang in thePittsburgh Post-Gazette.Top NewsUK government says coal mine approval based on an “error of law”:The recently-elected Labour government has refused to defend the December 2022 decision by the former Levelling Up Secretary, Michael Gove, approving West Cumbria Mining’s (WCM) proposed Woodhouse Colliery. Ahead of a High Court appeal against Gove’s decision, the recently appointed Secretary of State for Housing, Communities and Local Government, Angela Rayner, stated there was an “error of law” in approving the project. The new government had a representative present in the court during Friends of the Earth (FOE) and South Lakes Action on Climate Change (SLACC) appeal to respond to any questions from Justice David Holgate. The defence of the original decision fell to WCM, which argued that a recent Supreme Court decision affirming the emissions from the burning of fossil fuels must be considered did not affect its project. WCM argued that the 2.8 million tonnes of metallurgical coal produced annually from the proposed Whitehaven mine would substitute for coal produced elsewhere, so there would be no difference in emissions. FOE and SLACC challenged this claim. The decision has been reserved. A ruling in favour of FOE and SLACC would result in the resubmission of the application to the Secretary of State and a new inquiry into the project.(BBC,Climate Home News,South Lakes Action on Climate Change)Another Indian NGO blocked from receiving international funding:India’s Ministry of Home Affairs has revoked the Foreign Contribution Regulation Act registration of the Centre for Financial Accountability (CFA), a non-profit that investigates the environmental and human rights impacts of national and international financial institutions. Recent CFA reports include investigations of the environmental effects of Adani and other coal and petrochemical plants in western Gujarat and arrests of villagers opposing their displacement by Adani and the Andhra Pradesh Mineral Development Corporation’s Dhiroli coal mine. The ministry claimed it revoked CFA’s registration due to errors in two financial reports submitted more than four years ago. Joe Athialy, the executive director of the CFA, said the ministry has not provided details of any errors in its reports or provided any opportunity for corrections, unlike the process adopted with companies. “We believe that this action was taken on account of our work questioning the government,” Athialy said. Since the election of Prime Minister Narendra Modi in May 2014, thousands of NGOs have been stripped of their registration to receive foreign funding, including Oxfam, Amnesty International and the Centre for Policy Research.(Scroll,Context)Study finds open-cut coal mines contributed to Kentucky floods:A study by Kentucky’s former state geologist suggests that open-cut coal mining likely contributed to devastating floods that hit eastern Kentucky in July 2022, killing 45 people and damaging or destroying 9000 homes that housed 22,000 people. The author of the study, Bill Haneberg, was the state geologist with the Kentucky Geological Survey at the time and, since his retirement in 2023, has studied the extreme rainfall event and associated floods. He concluded that the effects of the 1000-year rainfall event made destructive floods “significantly worse”. His study found that mined areas could have contributed between 21 per cent and 150 per cent more water to the catchments compared to unmined areas. He said that while the mined areas were unlikely to add the maximum potential volume of water, there is a need to identify the magnitude of the problem and plan mitigation strategies accordingly.(Kentucky Lantern,Environmental and Engineering Geoscience)Major wastewater spill from US coal ash dam:Minnesota Power estimates that about 5.5 million gallons (20.8 million litres) of wastewater spilled from a coal ash dam at its 922 MW Boswell Energy Center in Minnesota. Minnesota Power, a subsidiary of Allete, initially stated that about one million gallons (3.8 million litres) of coal ash wastewater leaked from a fracture in an underground pipe from a dam where the company disposed of fly ash between 1980 and 2015. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency said it detected sulphate levels above limits to protect wild rice but below standards required for drinking water. Initial testing has also revealed higher levels of boron but not mercury, arsenic and selenium, elements commonly associated with wastewater from coal ash dams. The two operating coal units at the plant are scheduled for retirement in 2029 and 2035, respectively.(Star-Tribune)US utility still on investigators leash over Ohio corruption scandal:FirstEnergy, the utility at the centre of the US$61 million Ohio corruption scandal to bailout two nuclear and two coal plants, must continue to cooperate with federal prosecutors. As part of the July 2021 Deferred Prosecution Agreement, FirstEnergy agreed to pay US$230 million as a penalty with the potential dismissal of a wire fraud change contingent on ongoing cooperation with prosecutors. The original agreement was due to expire within the next month. FirstEnergy has admitted to bribing two Ohio government officials. An update on the case submitted to the court by federal prosecutors does not mention dropping the charge against FirstEnergy and requires the company to continue to cooperate until the “completion of any investigation, criminal prosecution, or civil proceeding” initiated by the Department of Justice. The prosecutors will provide the court with another update in February 2025. The company is still required to provide a quarterly list of all payments made to entities “known by FirstEnergy to be operating for the benefit of a public official”.(Reuters,Energy News Network,US Securities and Exchange Commission)NewsAustralia:Wangan and Jagalingou leader Adrian Burragubba haswrittento federal environment minister Tanya Plibersek, requesting an investigation into the health of the springs Doongmabulla Springs and the impact of Adani’s Carmichael mine on them.Australia:The full Federal Court of Australia hasrejectedthe submission of two coal companies that the Environment Council of Central Queensland should pay their costs for an unsuccessful appeal against the decision of the federal Minister of Environment to approve two mine expansions. The court ruled each party should cover their costs.New Zealand:RecordsrevealResources Minister Shane Jones invited coal companies to a February 16 dinner but omitted the meeting from his publicly disclosed ministerial appointments diary.South Africa:The new Minister for Forestry, Fisheries and Environment Minister, Dion George said hedoes notintend to overturn the pollution exemptions granted to Eskom for five of its coal power plants.South Korea:The South Korean government hasimposedsanctions on HK Yilin Shipping and its cargo ship Tok Songa over alleged breaches of United Nations Security Council resolutions restricting coal shipments from North Korea.Companies + MarketsNew IEA report finds renewable generation may pass coal in 2025:In itsElectricity Mid-Year Update, the International Energy Agency (IEA) estimates global electricity demand could increase by four per cent in 2024, driven by strong economic growth in China and India. The IEA also notes that increased demand drivers include additional air-conditioning during heatwaves, the expansion of data centres, along with the deployment of electric vehicles and heat pumps. The IEA estimates that increased solar and wind generation could cover up to three-quarters of demand growth in 2024, but coal power is unlikely to decline this year. However, the IEA expects renewables to pass coal generation for the first time in 2025. The dramatic increase in Chinese hydro generation in the first half of the year, after years of drought, could lead to a slight decline in global greenhouse gas emissions this year. The agency anticipates a declining utilisation rate of China’s coal fleet as renewable generation increases. The IEA estimates electricity demand in India could increase by eight per cent in 2024, with renewables to meet about half of the rise and one-third by coal generation. The IEA estimates the share of renewables generation – solar, wind and hydro – could increase from 30 per cent in 2023 to 37 per cent in 2026, with the bulk of the growth from increased solar capacity.(S & P Global,Engineering News,International Energy Agency [Pdf])Indian auction for solar with batteries reveals prices set to undercut coal:A Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI) tender for 1200 MW of solar paired with 600 MW/1200 megawatt-hour (MWh) battery storage has resulted in winning bids in the range of 3.41 – 3.42 rupees per kilowatt hour (US$0.041 per kWh). The losing bids for a further 1050 MW were only marginally more expensive, with prices of between 3.43 and 3.71 rupees per kilowatt hour (US$0.041 - US$0.044 per kWh). SECI will enter into 25-year power purchase agreements with the winning bidders. Amol Phadke, a staff scientist at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, said the low prices for solar with storage had “profound implications for future investments in peak and baseload power from other competing resources”, with new projects likely to be cheaper than new coal plants and faster to build.(Energy Storage News)Pakistan seeks Chinese approval to switch coal plants to domestic lignite:Pakistan’s Minister of Energy, Awais Leghari, wants the Chinese owners of coal plants reliant on expensive imported coal to agree to covert the plants to operate on domestic Thar lignite. The proposal follows an agreement with the International Monetary Fund for a US$7 billion, 37-month loan program to avoid Pakistan defaulting on existing loans. The agreement included a commitment to changing electricity tariffs, introducing unspecified “decisive cost-reducing reforms”, and “refraining from further unnecessary expansion of generation capacity”. The surge in the cost of imported thermal coal pushed the former Pakistan government to increase power prices and restrict purchases of imported coal. In April, the Pakistani company Engro sold the Engro Thar Coal Power Project and the Sindh Engro Coal Mining Company to Liberty Power, another local company aiming to benefit from a potential expansion of lignite production and power generation.(Reuters,International Monetary Fund)Investigation finds “turbine missile event” reflected poor safety culture:An investigation report into a explosion at CS Energy’s 848 MW Callide C coal plant in May 2021 has revealed a chain of errors that resulted in major damage to the generator and an outage that affected southeast Queensland. The 302-page report by forensic engineer Sean Brady found that a series of events led to the catastrophic failure of the rotor shaft in nine locations. The explosion threw a two-tonne section of the shaft five metres across the turbine hall and blasted a 300 kg piece of equipment 20 metres up through the roof of the plant. The report referred to the explosion as a “turbine missile event”. The report described state-owned CS Energy as an organisation that “did not value or practise effective process safety”. The unit, which suffered a separate cooling tower failure, is scheduled to resume operation on August 31, 2024. The explosion injured no one. In February 2024, the Australian Energy Regulator launched legal action against the operator of the plant for allegedly breaching market rules and performance standards.(RenewEconomy,CS Energy [Pdf])Green Steel TransitionSteel announcements reflect a shift to lower emissions production:Global Energy Monitor’s (GEM) annual survey of steel industry trends has found that 93 per cent of recently announced steelmaking projects are for electric arc furnace (EAF) capacity. Electric arc furnaces rely on the use of scrap steel feed in an electric powered plant with little or no coal. GEM estimates that EAF projects under construction or announced have increased from 33 per cent of capacity in 2022 to 49 per cent this year. However, just 14 per cent of the announced EAF capacity has entered the construction phase. The 2024 edition of GEM’sPedal to the Metalreport identifies 310 million tonnes per year (mtpy) annum of EAF capacity and 171 million mtpy of higher-emissions basic oxygen furnace (BOF) capacity in the development pipeline. A further 80 million mtpy of capacity has been announced, but no details on the proposed technology are available.(Carbon Brief,Global Energy Monitor [Pdf])No new coal-based steel plants in China approved in 2024:A Centre for Research on Energy and Clean Air (CREA) review of Chinese government data has found that all 7.1 million tonnes per annum of new steelmaking capacity approved in the first half of 2024 by provincial governments were electric arc furnace projects. CREA said the absence of any new coal-based steel projects in the first half of the year was the first time this has occurred since China announced its ‘dual carbon goals’ in September 2020. CREA said the absence of any approvals for new coal-based projects “could signify a turning point for the Chinese steel industry”. CREA noted that a recently released action plan emphasised the need to cut greenhouse gas emissions from the steel sector in 2024-2025 and announced restrictions on exports of iron and steel products. The introduction of the European Union’s Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism for carbon-intensive products, which comes into effect in 2026, has pushed China to improve carbon accounting measures to ensure compliance for steel exports.(Mining Weekly,Centre for Research on Energy and Clean Air [Pdf])Steel investors boost the role of lower emissions steel:A survey of more than 500 investors in the steel and related industries across 34 countries found that 68 per cent of respondents agreed there will be a transition away from relying on metallurgical coal-based steelmaking. The survey commissioned by the Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility found 80 per cent of respondents believe metallurgical coal’s risk profile will increase in the next decade. The bulk of the survey respondents were portfolio managers, investment managers or investment directors in institutions holding investments in steelmaking, iron ore and/or metallurgical coal mining companies. The survey also found that 52 per cent of investors accept that corporate lobbying activities are a significant factor in the persistence of coal-based steel production.(Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility)ResourcesA Bad Deal for Canada, MiningWatch Canada and the London Mining Network, July 2024. (Pdf)This 16-page report provides an overview of the controversial history of Glencore, the company that has been approved to buy the Canadian metallurgical coal mines owned by a Teck Resources subsidiary.Share on FacebookShare on TwitterForward to a FriendSubscribe