Campaign URLCopyTwitter0tweetsSubscribePast IssuesRSSTranslateEnglishالعربيةAfrikaansбеларуская мовабългарскиcatalà中文（简体）中文（繁體）HrvatskiČeskyDanskeesti keelNederlandsSuomiFrançaisDeutschΕλληνικήहिन्दीMagyarGaeilgeIndonesiaíslenskaItaliano日本語ភាសាខ្មែរ한국어македонски јазикبهاس ملايوMaltiNorskPolskiPortuguêsPortuguês - PortugalRomânăРусскийEspañolKiswahiliSvenskaעבריתLietuviųlatviešuslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпскиதமிழ்ภาษาไทยTürkçeFilipinoукраї́нськаTiếng ViệtAugust 1, 2024Issue 524|View Past IssuesPublished byGlobal Energy MonitorEditor's NoteThe long-running push by a smallSouth Africancompany to build the Yzermyn coal mine may finally have come to an end after a judge overturned a regional government decision to revoke a large part of the Mabola protected area. The decision is a vindication of the critical role civil society groups play in upholding the law and protecting the public interest.In a similar vein, a court decision to award anAustraliancoal mine worker A$3.2 million (US$2.1 million) in damages for black lung disease contracted from operating heavy machinery at several open-cut mines. In the public mind, black lung disease is associated with exposure to coal dust in the confines of underground coal mines. However, a growing global body of evidence demonstrates its occurrence in open-cut mines. But residents exposed to coal dust from mines, coal trucks, uncovered rail wagons and open-air coal stockpiles face significant hurdles in ensuring the control of coal dust pollution. InIndia, residents affected by dust from trucks transporting coal from Adani’s Talabira mine in Odisha have little recourse for compensation for damage done to their farmlands.Around the world, increasingly authoritarian governments are criminalising protests and seeking to undercut research and advocacy by civil society groups by preventing access to international funding. InVietnam, the government has jailed an energy researcher for her work on the country’s electricity grid and changes required to facilitate more wind and solar generation.FeaturesPoland has united to cut back on coal for home heating. This activist led the way.Since Anna Dworakowska and others formed Polish Smog Alert in 2012, the use of coal for home heating has dropped from 70 per cent to 50 per cent. In Krakow, where the group first started, coal use for home heating has plummeted from 30,000 homes to just 500,writesIsabelle de Pommereau inChristian Science Monitor.Glencore’s coal takeover draws the ire of Canadian parliamentariansMPs from multiple parties have expressed alarm that the Canadian government has approved Glencore’s bid to take over Teck Resources’ coal mines in British Columbia,writesNatasha Bulowski inNational Observer.From dust to dust: Adani’s Talabira coal mineAround the fringes of a vast Adani-operated coal mine in India coal dust from convoys of trucks have coated the dwellings and crops of local residents, but they have not received compensation because the coal company did not directly acquire their lands,writesAyaskant Das inAdani Watch.Understanding the ‘bad’ economics of Thar coalThe financial and environmental costs of switching coal plants to run on Thar lignite may undermine Pakistan’s climate policies, finances and desire for energy independence,writesDr Khalid Waleed from the Sustainable Development Policy Institute inThe News International.CampaignsSouth African court overturns approval for mine in a protected areaA coalition of seven environmental groups has won an appeal against the January 2021 decision of the Mpumalanga regional government to revoke four properties from the Mabola Protected Environment to allow a new coal mine. Uthaka Energy proposed the development of the Yzermyn coal mine in the Mabola protected area, one of 22 designated Strategic Water Source Areas established to preserve important freshwater catchments. The Mbombela High Court set aside the decision made by Vusi Shongwe, the member of Mpumalanga’s regional government responsible for environmental affairs. Acting Judge M Moleleki described Shongwe’s decision as “unlawful, unreasonable and procedurally unfair in failing to take relevant considerations into account and by taking irrelevant considerations into account”. The judge also found the mine would reduce the amount of water available for people and “threatens water security at both local and national level”.(The People’s Eye,groundWork)Top NewsVietnam sentences energy policy researcher to over three years in jail:Ngo Thi To Nhien, the Executive Director of the Hanoi-based Vietnam Initiative for Energy Transition (VIET), was sentenced to serve three and a half years in prison during a closed-door trial in Hanoi. Vietnam’s state-controlled media have not reported on the case. Nhien, an energy policy analyst, was arrested in September 2023 for the “appropriation of information or documents” when she was researching the ability of Vietnam’s electricity grid to cater for a larger share of solar and wind generation. At the time of her arrest Nhien was providing technical and policy advice to the United Nations Office for Project Services Southeast Asia Energy Transition Partnership program and the UN Development Program. Police also raided the office of VIET and interrogated the staff, leading to the organisation’s subsequent closure. In December 2022,  Vietnam agreed to a US$15.5 billion Just Energy Transition Partnership (JETP) with G7 and other governments to support the transition away from coal. Nhien is the sixth person working on environmental issues detained in the last two years. The Vietnam Climate Defenders Coalition, a group of civil society human rights and environmental groups, has called for the release of all climate and environmental defenders unjustly imprisoned in Vietnam and the development of clear principles to ensure civil society groups can freely participate in discussions on just transition plans.(Radio Free Asia,International Rivers)Report says South Africa 'off track' for climate goals:The State of Climate Action in South Africa by the Presidential Climate Commission (PCC), a climate advisory body appointed by South African President Cyril Ramaphosa, has warned that “contradictory” public policies and positions about the coal phase-out are contributing to a delay in implementing measures to support the country’s just transition. The report notes that South Africa is the fourteenth largest greenhouse gas emitter in the world. The report notes that 6000 megawatts (MW) of coal capacity will need to retire by 2030 and all coal plants close by 2042 to achieve the country’s 2050 decarbonisation goal. The PCC notes that state-owned Eskom is already behind schedule in decommissioning coal plants, and recent life extensions of the Camden, Grootvlei, and Hendrina plants “will put the country even further off track”. The report points out that renewable energy capacity in South Africa has increased roughly by 1000 MW a year since 2015, well short of the average of 6000 –14,000 MW a year required to decarbonise the energy system by 2050. A new report by the South African Reserve Bank argues the early adoption of transition measures will minimise risks to the country’s banks as exposure to transition risks in the corporate sector “are material and widespread”.(News24,Presidential Climate Commission,South African Reserve Bank [Pdf])Report finds major Indonesian coal firms don’t report methane emissions:A report by London-based energy think-tank Ember has found that only four of the top 10 Indonesian coal companies report estimates of coal mine methane emissions. The report states that six major companies – including Berau Coal, Bumi Resources, and Adaro Energy – do not disclose about 6.1 million tonnes of methane emissions a year. Ember estimates that the unreported methane emissions would potentially double the total greenhouse emissions of the country’s coal sector. Methane, which has 80 times the climate impact of carbon dioxide over 20 years, is emitted from both underground and open-cut coal mining and can continue to pollute long after closure. Ember notes that some Indonesian coal companies have adopted measures to reduce or offset greenhouse gas emissions, but none have adopted targets or measures to cut mine methane pollution. The Indonesian government has announced a coal production target of 922 million tonnes in 2024.(The Straits Times,Ember)Plant operator at open cut coal mines awarded A$3.2m for dust diseases:The New South Wales Dust Diseases Tribunal has awarded a former coalminer, Craig Keogh, A$3.2 million (US$2.1 million) in damages against contracting companies he worked for in mines in Queensland and NSW. The tribunal found Keogh had contracted black lung disease from exposure to coal dust at the Poitrel, Moorvale, Boggabri and Blackwater open cut mines. Commissioner Russell found all four defendants failed in their duty of care to Keogh and noted this was the first case finding coal worker’s pneumoconiosis in NSW or Queensland. Keogh argued that he was not informed of the risks of exposure to coal dust, with the cab of the diggers, bulldozers and graders exposed to significant dust levels due to worn seals and windows that would not close properly. He said that when he worked at the Poitrel mine between November 2008 and September 2012, mine supervisors selected new or recently maintained machines for dust monitoring tests.(Guardian,ABC News,Dust Diseases Tribunal)US groups blueprint for Trump aims to reverse coal policy gains:The Heritage Foundation’s 922-pageProject 2025policy blueprint if Donald Trump is re-elected President includes rescinding policies promoting increased renewables generation and ending support for measures to advance the 2015 Paris Agreement.Project 2025proposes the repeal the of Inflation Reduction Act that has promoted renewables and suggests working with the governors of Wyoming and Montana to restart coal leasing on federal lands “immediately”. The energy chapter also proposes utilising a proposed executive order by Trump to authorise the “discharge of nonperforming employees” in DOE’s Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSMRE). It also proposes retaining the previous Trump-era ‘Ten Day Rule’ that blocks citizens report potential coal mining violations of the Surface Mining Control Reclamation and Act, such as water and dust emissions. Criticism of many of the  proposals inProject 2025across social and other policy areas by the Democrats, commentators and civil society groups, prompted Trump to distance himself from the blueprint. However, Trump’s pick for Vice President, J.D. Vance, has enthusiastically praised the Heritage Foundation’s Kevin Roberts for his work on Project 2025.(Drilled,Guardian,Heritage Foundation [Pdf])NewsAustralia:A Queensland farming lobby group hasreacheda settlement with the federal government and Glencore over a decision not to require an environmental assessment of a proposed carbon storage project in the Great Artesian Basin.Australia:Revelations that Rio Tinto wasseekingto block the addition of new climate protection provisions in the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 has prompted the Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility to end engagement with the company on its climate advocacy.Pakistan:Hundreds of community members and tribal leaders from Mazikhel and Alamkhani haverejecteda coal mining lease deal that was signed without the consent of the entire tribe.US:Arch Coal reports that thermal coal sales in the first half of 2024slumpedby US$143.4 million and it now has about eight million US short tons (7.3 million tonnes) in stockpiles, about double the normal level.US:Geoff Verhoff from the Akin Group is the top donations ‘bundler’ for Donald Trump’s 2024 Presidential election. VerhoffadvisedFirstEnergy on its contributions to a dark money group involved in the Ohio House Bill 6 bailout scandal.US:Twenty-five states havefiledan appeal to the Supreme Court requesting a stay on the Environmental Protection Agency’s greenhouse gas emissions standards for fossil fuel plants.US:Warrior Met Coal and Black Warrior Riverkeeper, an environmental NGO, haveproposeda federal court consent decree requiring the company to repair a coal slurry impoundment at its Mine No. 7.Vietnam:Five coal mine workersdiedin an accident at the Hon Gai mine in Quang Ninh province. A subsidiary of state-owned coal company, Vinacomin, operates the mine.Companies + MarketsVietnam ponders challenge of aiding Lao coal exports:The deputy director of the coal department of Vietnam’s Ministry of Industry and Trade (MOIT), Trinh Duc Duy, told a conference of state-owned utilities that the agency wants power plant investors and coal importers to prioritise the use of coal from Laos. In July 2023, Vietnam signed a Memorandum of Understanding on cooperation in the coal sector aimed at facilitating the importation of up to 20 million tonnes of coal a year from Laos. Duy told the conference – which included representatives of the state-owned coal mining company Vinacomin and the power utility EVN – that transporting coal by trucks for more than 300 kilometres made Lao coal expensive. The ministry said other problems included the inability to sign long-term supply agreements, limited customs clearance capacity at the Lao border and the lack of coal warehouses. Vietnam is promoting the development of coal conveyor systems to move coal across the border. In early July, the government of Quang Tri Province approved the construction of a six-kilometre-long conveyor system to export up to 30 million tonnes of coal a year from Laos.(Viet Nam News)China backs switch of Pakistan plants to domestic lignite:The Chinese government has reportedly agreed to a proposal by Pakistan’s Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb and Energy Minister Owais Leghari to convert three Chinese-backed coal plants reliant on imported coal to run on domestic lignite. The three plants are the 1320 MW Sahiwal plant, the 1320 MW Hub plant, and the 1320 MW Port Qasim plant. The costs and schedule of the conversions have not been finalised. Part of the conversion process requires Pakistan Railways to build a 105-kilometre track connecting the Thar coal mines to the existing railway at New Chhor in Sindh province, as well as an 18-kilometre spur line to Bin Qasim and Port Qasim. The proposed line would have capacity for 10 million tonnes of lignite a year.(The Express Tribune,The News International)Report finds subsidised coal plants displacing wind in major US market:A new report by the consultancy Grid Strategies for NRDC estimates that uneconomic coal plants caused the curtailment of 3.8 million megawatt-hours (MWh) of wind generation in the Midcontinent Independent System Operator (MISO) grid. MISO manages the electricity grid for 15 central US states and Manitoba in Canada. The report argues that vertically integrated utilities own the bulk of the 46,000 MW of coal plants in MISO. Regulated rates on the plants guarantee a rate of return on the power stations, with fuel costs passed onto the end user. Grid Strategies estimates uneconomic coal plants in MISO cost customers US$1.1 billion in excess costs between 2021 and 2023. The report notes that energy regulators in Louisiana, Michigan, and Ohio are investigating instances of uneconomic dispatch. The report argues state regulators can block utilities from recovering funds from uneconomic dispatch while MISO could ensure bids reflect the actual costs.(Louisiana Illuminator,NRDC)India aims to boost coal production:The Ministry of Coal’s ‘action plan’ for 2024/25 proposes increasing coal production to 1080 million tonnes, up from 997 million tonnes the year before. The ministry states it is aiming to auction off a further 20-25 coal blocks with a production capacity of 170 million tonnes a year as part of a plan to establish up to 100 new mines to produce an extra 500 million tonnes of coal a year by 2029/2030. The ministry also proposes increasing metallurgical coal production to 80 million tonnes this year, underpinned by coal washery capacity. The ministry also released details of a study by theIndian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad, that suggested India could export up to 15 million tonnes of coal to neighbouring countries, including eight million tonnes to Bangladesh, three million tonnes to Myanmar and two million tonnes to Nepal. The report flagged the 1320 MW Rampal power station (which is also referred to as the Maitree Super plant) in Bangladesh, a joint venture between NTPC and the Bangladesh Power Development Board, requires five million tonnes of coal a year.(Ministry of Coal [Pdf],Economic Times)ResourcesSlow to Switch: India’s largest corporates slow to switch to renewable energy,Climate Risk Horizons, July 2024. (Pdf)This 47-page report find that most of the 33 major Indian companies reviewed have sourced little of their electricity requirements from renewables. India’s industrial sector, including cement, steel, aluminium, fertilisers and IT sectors, is responsible for over half of the country’s total energy demand.“Just Energy Transition Partnerships and the future of coal”,Nature Climate Change, July 7, 2024.This paper reviews the Just Energy Transition Partnerships for Vietnam, South Africa and Indonesia and concludes the extension to other coal-reliant economies can keep the Paris Agreement goals within reach.Share on FacebookShare on TwitterForward to a FriendSubscribe