Campaign URLCopyTwitter0tweetsSubscribePast IssuesRSSTranslateEnglishالعربيةAfrikaansбеларуская мовабългарскиcatalà中文（简体）中文（繁體）HrvatskiČeskyDanskeesti keelNederlandsSuomiFrançaisDeutschΕλληνικήहिन्दीMagyarGaeilgeIndonesiaíslenskaItaliano日本語ភាសាខ្មែរ한국어македонски јазикبهاس ملايوMaltiNorskPolskiPortuguêsPortuguês - PortugalRomânăРусскийEspañolKiswahiliSvenskaעבריתLietuviųlatviešuslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпскиதமிழ்ภาษาไทยTürkçeFilipinoукраї́нськаTiếng ViệtAugust 8, 2024Issue 525|View Past IssuesPublished byGlobal Energy MonitorEditor's NoteThe transformation of the European Union’spower sectorcontinues to gather pace. A recent report highlighted that coal power generation slumped by 24 per cent in the first half of 2024. Coal generation is rapidly losing ground due to the combined effect of the rollout of new renewable capacity, higher hydro generation and the effects of the region’s carbon price. InGreece, the state-owned utility PPC flagged a new schedule for the end of coal generation, including the closure by 2028 of a brand new lignite unit it commissioned just last year. InRomania, the country’s transmission system operator envisages the closure of the country’s remaining coal plants by 2026. In theUS, coal mine production continues to slide, and coal power may slump to a 16.1 per cent share of electricity generation this year.In India, the story is more complicated. A newanalysissuggests the Adani Group is on track to double its coal production to more than 150 million tonnes a year with plans for a suite of new mines. Even so, the rapid increase in India’s peak electricitydemandindicates that even the completion of all coal, hydro and nuclear plants under construction will not cover peak demand by 2027. The report argues only a rapid increase in utility-scale solar paired with batteries offers the prospect of avoiding significant shortages at times of peak demand.InIndonesia, the country’s second-largest Muslim group has agreed to seek the allocation of a coal concession, a policy initiated by President Joko Widodo to provide an income stream to the country’s religious groups.FeaturesKosovo villagers cry foul over land seizures for coal mineA member of parliament from Kosovo’s ruling party is facing questions over his role in the expropriation of land west of Pristina by Kosovo’s power company,writesShqipron Xhema and Ardita Zeqiri inBalkan Insight.Vietnam’s direct power purchase agreement decree could catalyse a new era for renewable energyThe Vietnamese government’s recent decree permitting direct power purchase agreements for renewable energy between private project developers and private energy consumers could ignite a new wave of rapid renewable energy development,writesGrant Hauber from the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis inEnergy Tracker Asia.Top NewsEuropean coal generation slumps in the first half of 2024:Coal generation in the 27 countries in the European Union fell by 24 per cent in the first half of 2024, according to a report by Ember, a UK climate policy think tank. A 20 per cent increase in solar generation and a 9.5 per cent rise in wind power drove a decline in coal generation compared to the same period in 2023. The combined 13 per cent increase in wind and solar generation outpaced a 0.7 per cent increase in electricity demand. Increased hydro generation also contributed to reduced fossil fuel generation. Ember estimates that 75 per cent of the decline in coal generation occurred in just five European Union countries: Germany, Italy, Spain, France and Belgium. The report found that in May 2024, coal generation in Poland slipped to just 57 per cent, a record low compared to the 80 per cent supplied in the same month five years ago.(Guardian,Ember)Greece brings the end date for its coal fleet forward once again:Greece’s state-owned Public Power Corporation (PPC) has told parliament that all coal plants are likely to close down by the end of 2026, including the 660 MW Ptolemaida 5 lignite plant commissioned in late 2023. Regulators approved the unit in 2013 but construction didn’t commence until 2016. NGOs opposed the construction of the plant and argued PPC should use the site for new renewable capacity. By the time PPC commissioned the unit in 2023, a new government had set a 2028 end date for lignite generation and backed converting Ptolemaida 5 to run on gas. Now, PPC acknowledges the unit, with an estimated production cost of €120 per megawatt-hour (MWh), is uneconomic due to current natural gas and European Union carbon prices and will close in 2026. In September, PPC will close two 300 MW units at the Agios Dimitrios plant. The units were scheduled to close in 2025. The other three units at the plant, with a combined capacity of 995 MW, will cease operations in 2025 as previously planned. The 330 MW Meliti and 300 MW Megalopolis will also close in 2025, as announced in 2021.(Balkan Green Energy News)Draft Romanian plan envisages the end of coal generation in 2026:A draft ten-year transmission plan by Transelectrica, Romania’s transmission system operator, envisages the closure of the country’s remaining coal plants by 2026. Romania’s official coal phase-out target is 2032, but high European Union emission prices have led to the dramatic curtailment of lignite generation. Romania currently has 1900 MW of coal capacity, down from 5300 MW in 2012. State-owned Complexul Energetic Oltenia and other utilities plan to replace existing coal capacity with gas and renewables and expand interconnection capacity with neighbouring countries.(Balkan Green Energy News)Another Indonesian religious group accepts an offer of a coal concession:Muhammadiyah, Indonesia’s second-largest Islamic group with about 60 million followers, will accept a government offer to operate a coal concession. Indonesian President Joko Widodo issued a regulatory change in late May to allow religious groups to operate mining concessions. The government suggested at the time that Nahdlatul Ulama, Indonesia’s largest Islamic organisation, would be allocated a former part ofKaltim Prima Coal’s (KPC) concessioninEast Kalimantan to provide it with a source of income. Muhammadiyah said the government has earmarked six mining concessions for religious groups, four in East Kalimantan and two in South Kalimantan. The offers of coal concessions follow increasing engagement in environmental issues by Indonesia’s Islamic organisations. The deputy chair of Muhammadiyah’s environmental council, Hening Parlan, expressed disappointment over the decision.(Mongabay)Report reveals Adani’s plans to double its coal production:The Adani Group could produce over 150 million tonnes of coal a year from existing and proposed mines in India, Indonesia and Australia, according to an analysis of company reports byAdani Watch. The company currently has five operating mines – three in India and one each in Australia and Indonesia – that produce about 68 million tonnes a year. Another mine in India is under construction but not yet producing coal. Adani subsidiaries have also proposed 16 new mine projects in India which, combined with the one under construction, could add an extra 78 million tonnes a year production capacity. The combined coal reserves of the existing and proposed projects amount to more than seven billion tonnes of coal.(Adani Watch)Indian agency files corruption charges against Hindalco over coal mine:The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), India’s federal agency responsible for investigating corruption, has charged aluminium producer Hindalco with engaging in corrupt practices to win environmental approval for the Talabira coal mine in Odisha. Hindalco, which operates 2983 MW of coal plant capacity and four coal mines, is a subsidiary of Aditya Birla Group. The CBI investigation began in 2016 following allegations that Aditya Birla bribed officials from the Ministry of Environment and Forests and Climate Change (MoEFFCC) to approve the mine. The CBI alleges that a former MoEFFCC director and member of the Expert Appraisal Committee approved the Talabira-I mine in breach of the agency’s guidelines. A Hindalco spokesperson described the CBI’s charges as “an old matter from 2014-15”.(Hindu BusinessLine)NewsAustralia:A workerdiedafter a crane accident at QCOAL’s Byerwen coal mine in Queensland.Canada:The Department of Environment and Climate Change Canada hasfiledfive charges under the Fisheries Act against Teck Resources, alleging “harmful” deposits into Dry Creek from the company’s Line Creek mine and the Fording River.China:Four mine workersdiedin an accident at an underground coal mine in Jungar Banner in the city of Ordos, Inner Mongolia.India:Coal India has taken a 51 per cent stake in ajoint venture[pdf] with GAIL, a state-owned gas utility, to establish a coal-to-synthetic gas plant near Bardhaman in West Bengal.Companies + MarketsReport says India needs rapid solar and battery rollout to avoid shortages:A report by the India Energy and Climate Centre at the University of California estimates that India is likely to experience peak evening electricity shortages of between 20,000 and 40,000 MW by 2027. Between May 2019 and May 2024, India’s peak electricity demand increased by 68,000 MW, an annual growth rate of 6.5 per cent. The report argues that shortages will occur in the evenings even with the completion of all coal, nuclear and hydro projects under construction. About 21,480 MW of coal projects are under construction, with a further 6800 MW of nuclear and 12,818 MW of hydro due to be completed by 2027. The authors argue India should aim to install between 100,000 MW and 120,000 MW of new utility-scale solar capacity by 2027, with 50,000 to 100,000 MW of it paired with between 16,000 MA and 30,000 MW of four to six hours of battery storage.(Deccan Herald,India Energy and Climate Centre at the University of California)US coal production slumps as stockpiles grow:The Energy Information Administration (EIA) estimates coal will provide just 16.1 per cent of US electricity generation in 2024 as old plants are retired and utilisation rates at remaining units decline. The EIA estimates US coal production will slump to 499 million US short tons (453 million tonnes) in 2024, down 14.2 per cent compared to 2023, and forecasts a further five per cent decline in 2025 to 474 million US short tons (430 million tonnes). The agency estimates US coal exports at 103 million US short tons, a three per cent increase on the year before. In a separate bulletin, the EIA estimates coal stockpiles at power plants have increased to 138 million short tons (125 million tonnes), the most since the downturn in power demand in the first half of 2020 due to COVID-19. Coal consumption by the US power sector was 385 million short tons (349 million tonnes) in 2023, a 43 per cent fall since 2016. Coal transported for the US power sector has plummeted from 957 million US short tons (868 million tonnes) in 2010 to 422 million US short tons in 2023. In 2023, coal transported to power stations declined by eight per cent.(S & P Global,Power Engineering,US Energy Information Administration)Pakistan government and Sindh province to split cost of coal railway:The Pakistan government and the Sindh provincial government will split the costs of the 58 billion rupees (US$210 million) of a new 10 million tonnes per annum railway line from the Thar coalfield to Chorr, according to an anonymous official with the Sindh Coal Energy Board. The project also requires the construction of a nine-kilometre line between Bin Qasim to Port Qasim. Sindh province said it estimated the value of the land it will provide at 1.5 billion rupees (US$5.4 million) but will be required to finance the balance of its share of the project. The railway is part of the federal government’s plan to switch existing imported coal plants to burn lower-grade domestic lignite.(The News)Cost of Chinese-backed plant in Pakistan soars again:The National Electric Power Regulatory Authority (Nepra) has approved a 24 per cent increase in the capital cost of CIHC Pak Power Company’s proposed 300 MW Gwadar power project. In the third revised cost of the project, Nepra approved the proposed increase in the price of the plant from the US$358.3 million approved last year to US$444.49 million. The consortium argued the revised estimate is due to rising construction costs, higher insurance premiums and interest rates and changes in the exchange rate. As part of the latest revision, Nepra has approved a 30-year tariff for the project of 25.29 rupees per kWh (US$0.09 per kWh). The revised power price, up from the original 6.96 rupees per kWh (US$0.03), allows for a 14 per cent guaranteed return on investment. The previous Pakistan government opposed the new imported coal plant and unsuccessfully pressed CIHC Pak Power to switch to domestic lignite or a solar project. The Chinese government backed the consortium’s original proposal, and the Pakistan government backed down.(Dawn,Global Energy Monitor)Barclays exploits policy loophole to fund US coal power utilities:The Bureau of Investigation and ITV found that Barclays raised US$1.7 billion for utilities operating coal plants in the US, despite its policy to end financing support for companies generating more than half of their revenue from coal power. The report found that in 2023, the bank provided two US$400 million loans to Monongahela Power, a West Virginia utility that generates 95 per cent of its electricity from coal. The utility only sells electricity from its plants. Barclays defended its funding, arguing Monongahela Power’s income from transmission and distribution put it under the 50 per cent threshold. Seth Feaster from the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis said Barclays was trying to have it both ways and had created “an enormous loophole that appears to allow it to largely continue doing business as usual with coal-friendly utilities”. Barclays also raised US$400 million for Kentucky Utilities and $500 million for Louisville Gas & Electric, both of which were estimated to be well over the 50 per cent coal revenue threshold in 2022. Barclays is also the biggest lender to the coal power industry in Europe, with US$75 billion loaned to companies in the sector in 2023.(The Bureau of Investigative Journalism)Unplanned coal outages allowed utilities to push prices higher:An investigation into short-term spikes in electricity prices in Australia’s National Electricity Market found that unplanned outages at three old coal plants in May, along with two planned network outages limiting access to low-prices generation, contributed to energy prices exceeding A$5000 per megawatt-hour (MWh) (US$3257 per MWh) . Unplanned outages at two coal units at Origin Energy’s Eraring plant removed 1440 MW from the grid, and technical problems forced the downgrading of another unit by 200 MW. Delta Electricity’s 660 MW Vales Point unit 5 tripped and was offline from May 8 to May 24, and another unit was operating at between 400-260 below capacity. The Australian Energy Regulator reported that AGL Energy and EnergyAustralia “put upward pressure on prices by reducing the amount of low-priced capacity offered” to the market from its Bayswater and Mt Piper power stations. The AER noted that while utilities maximising profits is allowed under the rules of the market, “the behaviour may not have been in the best interests of energy consumers”. Tony Wood from the Grattan Institute said the incidence of unplanned outages from old coal units had increased over the last five years and will become increasingly expensive to maintain.(Sydney Morning Herald [paywall],Australian Energy Regulator [Pdf])ResourcesDomestic coal is far from providing a baseload in Türkiye, Ember, August 2024. (Pdf)This 29-page report provides a detailed overview of Turkiye’s struggling fleet of coal plants and argues for an overhaul of the country’s energy policy with a stronger focus on expanding renewables.Thinking beyond diversification: Next step in China’s coal power transition, Ember, August 2024. (Pdf)This 21-page report argues that the diversification by China’s state-owned coal enterprises into renewables has been an influential factor in the country’s power sector transition, but greater attention is also required to other parts of the coal supply chain.“Georgia’s coal ash cleanup controversies, explained”,Grist, July 29, 2024.This article provides an overview of the controversy over what to do with coal ash left after the 2019 closure of Georgia Power’s Plant Hammond. While the focus is local, many of the same issues apply elsewhere.Triggering investment in first-of-a-kind and early near-zero emissions industrial facilities, Center on Global Energy Policy at Columbia University School of International and Public Affairs,August 2024. (Pdf)This 60-page report explores policies that can make investments in first-of-a-kind near-zero emission industrial facilities viable. The report includes a case study on the H2 Green Steel project in Sweden.Share on FacebookShare on TwitterForward to a FriendSubscribe