Campaign URLCopyTwitter0tweetsSubscribePast IssuesRSSTranslateEnglishالعربيةAfrikaansбеларуская мовабългарскиcatalà中文（简体）中文（繁體）HrvatskiČeskyDanskeesti keelNederlandsSuomiFrançaisDeutschΕλληνικήहिन्दीMagyarGaeilgeIndonesiaíslenskaItaliano日本語ភាសាខ្មែរ한국어македонски јазикبهاس ملايوMaltiNorskPolskiPortuguêsPortuguês - PortugalRomânăРусскийEspañolKiswahiliSvenskaעבריתLietuviųlatviešuslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпскиதமிழ்ภาษาไทยTürkçeFilipinoукраї́нськаTiếng ViệtAugust 15, 2024Issue 526|View Past IssuesPublished byGlobal Energy MonitorEditor's NoteAs the transition to renewables has accelerated, Japan has stepped up its promotion of a suite of technologies aimed at extending the life of coal plants, especially in Southeast Asia. As the hype about carbon capture and storage on coal plants has faded, Japan and coal industry groups have promoted co-firing coal units with alternative fuels such as biomass and ammonia as a path to emissions reductions. A newpaperinNaturedissects the likely implications of large-scale biomass co-firing in Indonesia. At best, a low ratio of biomass use from crop waste and sawdust would marginally reduce emissions. At worst, it would result in accelerated deforestation of primary forests, affect local communities and threaten biodiversity.In a separate development, theSupreme Court of Indonesiahas upheld the conviction of a former regional official accused of accepting bribes from a construction subsidiary of the South Korean company Hyundai. The company had the contract to build a Japanese-financed coal unit facing local community opposition. InIndia, a new report by Hindenburg Research has put the spotlight back on the corporate regulator tasked with investigating the ultimate beneficiaries of investors in Adani group companies.Elsewhere,Glencore– the world’s largest exporter of thermal coal – announced that it won’t spin off its coal division. Last year, the company suggested that if it succeeded in taking over Elk Valley Resources, which holds Teck Resources Canadian metallurgical coal projects, it would offload its coal assets and focus on other commodities. The decision to keep coal puts a big question mark over the company’s climate plan that previously backed winding down coal production.FeaturesSingapore’s banks and regulators can do more to drive a regional coal phaseoutFor a genuine coal phaseout, it is essential that private banks cease funding for any new coal expansion and redirect these funds towards investments in grid infrastructure, renewable energies and the decommissioning of coal assets,writesDanielle Koh inEcoBusiness.Pro-coal arguments in ASEAN are based on false assumptions and unproven solutionsRecent arguments against phasing out coal in Southeast Asia ignore that the volatility of the international coal price undercuts the viability of coal-based generation during global energy disruptions and reduces energy security,writesChristopher Doleman for the Institute for Energy Economics & Financial Analysis.Even with hard work, a just transition needs long-term supportThe gradual closure of what was once the 2310 megawatt (MW) Turceni lignite plant in Romania illustrates the difficulties faced by local authorities in coal-dependent regions. People are used to massive coal power plants and mines and find it hard to accept that equally gargantuan industries will not replace them,writesPippa Gallop from CEE Bankwatch inJust Transition.Top NewsIndonesian NGOs call on Japan to cancel loan after bribery conviction:The Indonesian Supreme Court has confirmed the conviction of the former regent of Cirebon, Sunjaya Purwadisastra, who the Corruption Eradication Commission (KPK) charged over allegations he received bribes and gratuities worth up to 64.2 billion rupiah (US$4.1 million) from Hyundai Engineering & Construction (HEC) to support for the 924 MW Cirebon 2 coal unit. HEC was the construction contractor for a joint venture that includes Marubeni and JERA. The unit began operation in mid-2023. In the wake of the ruling, Walhi (Friends of the Earth Indonesia) and three other local community organisations and NGOs called on the Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC) to immediately suspend the loans for the project and require mandatory prepayment of loans for the unit, in line with the provisions of its anti-bribery policy. In May 2019, Purwadisastra was convicted in a separate bribery case and sentenced to five years in prison.(Friends of the Earth Japan)US utility pays US$19.5 million to settle case on bribery scandal:FirstEnergy has agreed to pay US$19.5 million to settle an Ohio state government investigation into corrupt payments made by the utility to ‘dark money’ groups controlled by the former Republican Speaker of the Ohio House of Representatives, Larry Householder, and to former Chairman of the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio, Samuel Randazzo. As part of the agreement, Ohio Attorney General Dave Yost agreed to drop criminal charges and a civil case against the utility. Householder is currently serving a 20-year sentence for his role in the US$61 million bribery scandal, while Randazzo recently died. FirstEnergy had previously admitted in a federal case that it had bribed Householder and Randazzo and paid US$230 million as part of a settlement agreement. With FirstEnergy’s support, Householder succeeded in passing legislation to bail out two of the utility’s loss-making nuclear plants and two coal plants. Cases filed by Yost against former FirstEnergy executives are continuing.(Akron Beacon Journal,Ohio Attorney General)US seeks order against coal companies owned by Republican governor:A US Department of Justice attorney has requested a district court find 23 coal companies owned by West Virginia Republican Governor Jim Justice guilty of civil contempt over non-payment of penalties owing to the Mine Safety and Health Administration. The Department of Justice reached an agreement with Justice’s Southern Coal Corporation and associated entities in 2020 to pay US$5.13 million in monthly instalments of US$102,442 to settle the debt on 2297 citations and civil penalties issued by federal mine inspectors between 2014 and 2019. The deadline for payment was March 1, 2024, but the companies still owe US$579,042. In May, the Republican party selected Justice as its candidate in the November 2024 election for a seat in the US Senate. Justice is considered likely to win the seat vacated by former Democratic Senator for West Virginia turned independent, Joe Manchin. The US Senate is currently finely balanced, with Republicans holding 49 of the 100 seats and Democrats holding 47. Four independents, including Manchin, caucus with the Democrats.(News & Sentinel,US Department of Justice [Pdf])Report challenges Indian regulator over link to Bermuda fund:Hindenburg Research, a US-based short seller, has released a new report accusing the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) Chairperson, Madhabi Buch and her husband, of previously holding an investment in a Bermuda-based company, Global Dynamic Opportunities Fund. This fund also attracted investments from a company controlled by Vinod Adani, the brother of Gautam Adani, the Chairman of the Adani Group. After Hindenburg Research released a report on the Adani Group in January 2023, the Supreme Court of India ordered SEBI to investigate the Hindenburg allegations of potential breaches of disclosure rules for stock exchange-listed companies. One of SEBI’s 24 investigations remains uncompleted. The Buchs rejected Hindenburg’s latest report, but the company said their response raised more questions.(The Wire,BBC,Hindenburg Research,Livemint)Welsh parliamentary committee pans flaws in coal mine rehabilitation:A report by the Welsh Parliament’s Climate Change, Environment, and Infrastructure Committee (CCEIC) criticised the poor management, public consultation and restoration standards for open-cut coal mining sites in Wales. The report called on the Welsh government to press the UK government to remove the Coal Authority’s statutory duty to maintain and develop a “viable” coal industry and for increased funding for the restoration of disused coal sites. The committee cited the Ffos-y-Fran mine, where Merthyr Tydfil County Borough Council delayed action on illegal mining activities after the mine’s license expired in September 2022, as a “symbol of the system’s failures”. The original proposal of Merthyr (South Wales) was to mine about 10 million tonnes of coal and fund the restoration of the area to create open space for the community. Restoration of the site could cost up to £120 million (US$154 million) compared to the £15 million (US$19.3 million) held by the local authority for the work. The company is proposing a rehabilitation plan that leaves the mine void and is part-filled with water.(BBC,Climate Change, Environment, and Infrastructure Committee [Pdf],Coal Action Network)“It now appears that the site operator [at the Ffos-y-Fran mine] has no intention of fulfilling its restoration obligations as per the original plan. Like so many others, it has taken profits from the site, but now the money they promised for restoration is not there,”stated [Pdf]the report by the Welsh Parliament’s Climate Change, Environment, and Infrastructure Committee.NewsAustralia:The High Court of Australia hasdeclinedto the Environment Council of Central Queensland’s application for special leave to appeal against the decision of the Minister for Environment, Tanya Plibersek, to approve two large coal mine expansions.Australia:Officials from Resources Safety and Health Queenslandraidedthe offices of Metarock, a coal mine contracting company. The raid follows the deaths of two coal mine workers, one at Sojitz Corporation’s Crinum mine in 2021 and another at Anglo American’s Moranbah North mine in March 2022.Canada:A coalition of First Nations and environmental groups hascalledon the Minister of Environment and Climate Change, Steven Guilbeault, to require federal assessment of Coalspur’s proposed expansions of the Vista thermal coal mine in Alberta.India:The Damodar Valley Corporation hasawardeda contract to BHEL for the construction of a 1600 MW expansion of the Koderma coal plant in Jharkhand.Pakistan:The state-owned Jamshoro Power hascommissionedthe 660 MW Unit 5 at the Jamshoro coal plant. The Asian Development Bank was the main funder of the new unit.US:The Energy Information Administrationestimatesthe wind sector generated more electricity in March and April than coal power plants.US:The Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservationestimatesindustry bonds available for coal mine reclamation are at least US$34.4 million below what is needed.“If the American people elect a conservative president, his administration will have to eradicate climate change references from absolutely everywhere,”saidBethany Kozma, former deputy chief of staff at the US Agency for International Development, in a training video as part of Project 2025 for a new Trump administration.Companies + MarketsStudy finds Indonesian biomass plan could increase deforestation:A paper published inNatureestimates that biomass co-firing can only play a limited role in reducing greenhouse gas emissions from coal plants. Indonesia’s state-owned power utility, PLN, set a target in 2022 for biomass co-firing at 52 coal plants to contribute 10 per cent of electricity by 2050. Most of the biomass currently used at 32 coal plants relies on rice husks and sawdust byproducts, but increased volumes would require forest plantations dedicated to supplying the energy sector. The study finds that co-firing at higher ratios causes fouling in existing boilers, the economics of biomass supply are challenging, and year-round supply is uncertain in eastern Indonesia, where coal use is expanding most rapidly. The Ministry of Environment and Forestry has designated 5.4 million hectares of forest for energy plantations and commenced allocating concessions to project developers. The study warns that converting intact primary forests for biomass plantations will never offset emission losses from deforestation and threaten local communities and biodiversity.(Nature)Rules relaxed so Adani can sell export power into the Indian market:India’s Ministry of Power has agreed to relax the 2018 rules on power exports to Bangladesh to allow generators also to sell electricity into the Indian market.Reutersreports that an internal ministry memo states that the government may allow a plant to sell electricity into the domestic market “in case of sustained non-scheduling of full or part capacity”. The only Indian plant approved to export power to Bangladesh is Adani Power’s 1600 MW Godda coal plant. The Godda project is underwritten with a high-cost contract with the Bangladesh Power Development Board and burns coal imported from Adani’s Carmichael coal mine in Australia. Two Indian government-owned financial institutions, the Power Finance Corporation and Rural Electrification Corporation, provided the bulk of the finance for the plant.(Reuters,Global Energy Monitor)Internal report finds major funding needed for South African coal railway:An internal report for the South African state-owned rail operator estimates that restoring the capacity of the main coal railway to the Richards Bay Coal Terminal requires the investment of 12.2 billion rand (US$670 million) over five years. The review suggests capacity could fall to as low as 38 million tonnes of coal a year in the absence of the required work. In 2023, Transnet carried 48 million tonnes of coal on the railway, with 53 million tonnes expected this year. Transnet’s operations have been affected by the theft of cabling, a lack of locomotives and difficulty obtaining spare parts. The report proposes investments to increase capacity to 78 million tonnes a year.(News24)Complaint against Philippines Energy Secretary over coal plant approval:The Power for the People Coalition (P4P Coalition) has filed a case with the Philippines Ombudsman against the Department of Energy Secretary Raphael Lotilla over his decision in 2023 to approve the 169 MW Unit 3 at the Therma Visayas coal plant in Bato. The complaint alleges Lotilla approved the expansion of the plant in violation of the moratorium on new coal plants instituted in December 2020. It also argues that Lotilla’s decision favoured AboitizPower, a utility he was a board member of until he resigned in July 2022 when he was appointed Energy Secretary. The Philippines Chamber of Commerce and Industry (PCCI) has backed Lotilla’s approval of the plant expansion, complaining the filing of the case risked deterring foreign direct investment. The PCCI argued the Department of Energy’s December 2020 moratorium applied to greenfield projects, existing plants with “firm” expansion plans and “indicative” projects with approved permits and plans. However, P4P Coalition said as recently as late 2023 AboitizPower hadn’t decided whether they were proposing a gas or coal-fired unit and was obviously not in the coal project pipeline in December 2020.(P4P Coalition [Facebook],BusinessWorld)Glencore decides to keep its coal business:Glencore has decided to keep all its coal operations on the basis that cash generated will boost returns to shareholders and provide the opportunity to invest in other divisions of the company. Before it purchased 77 per cent of Elk Valley Resources (EVR), the Canadian metallurgical coal division of Teck Resources, Glencore had flagged the possibility that it would merge the Canadian mines and its thermal coal projects in Australia, South Africa and Columbia into an expanded coal unit and spin it off. Glencore said it will assess how the expansion of its coal production capacity with the purchase of EVR will affect its climate strategy. In April, Glencore released its 2024-2026 Climate Action Transition Plan but this does address the acquisition of the EVR mines. The Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility (ACCR)​, which has pressured the company to align its business with the goals of the Paris Agreement, said the purchase of EVR increases Glencore’s potential saleable coal by over 30 per cent, with most of the newly acquired mines likely to operate beyond 2050. ACCCR said Glencore needs to urgently update its climate plan and provide investors with a plan to wind down its coal mines in line with the Paris Agreement. Days before Glencore’s coal announcement, the Swiss attorney general’s office announced it had fined the company US$152 million for failing to prevent a business partner from bribing a public official in 2011 over the sale of two Congolese copper and cobalt mines. The company has paid US$1.7 billion in the last few years to settle a range of bribery and corruption investigations affecting different divisions of the company.(Glencore,Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility,Mining.com)ResourcesIndonesia’s expansion of clean power can spur growth and equality, Ember, August 2024. (Pdf) (An Indonesian version of the report is availablehere.)This 28-page report reviews the potential for the government to facilitate the construction of new renewables projects in Indonesia’s coal-producing regions to soften the impacts of the energy transition.Share on FacebookShare on TwitterForward to a FriendSubscribe